Topic: 7q11.23 duplication syndrome

Q: What is (are) 7q11.23 duplication syndrome ?
A: 7q11.23 duplication syndrome is a condition that can cause a variety of neurological and behavioral problems as well as other abnormalities.  People with 7q11.23 duplication syndrome typically have delayed development of speech and delayed motor skills such as crawling and walking. Speech problems and abnormalities in the way affected individuals walk and stand may persist throughout life. Affected individuals may also have weak muscle tone (hypotonia) and abnormal movements, such as involuntary movements of one side of the body that mirror intentional movements of the other side.  Behavioral problems associated with this condition include anxiety disorders (such as social phobias and selective mutism, which is an inability to speak in certain circumstances), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), physical aggression, excessively defiant behavior (oppositional disorder), and autistic behaviors that affect communication and social interaction. While the majority of people with 7q11.23 duplication syndrome have low-average to average intelligence, intellectual development varies widely in this condition, from intellectual disability to, rarely, above-average intelligence. About one-fifth of people with 7q11.23 duplication syndrome experience seizures.  About half of individuals with 7q11.23 duplication syndrome have enlargement (dilatation) of the blood vessel that carries blood from the heart to the rest of the body (the aorta); this enlargement can get worse over time. Aortic dilatation can lead to life-threatening complications if the wall of the aorta separates into layers (aortic dissection) or breaks open (ruptures).  The characteristic appearance of people with 7q11.23 duplication syndrome can include a large head (macrocephaly) that is flattened in the back (brachycephaly), a broad forehead, straight eyebrows, and deep-set eyes with long eyelashes. The nose may be broad at the tip with the area separating the nostrils attaching lower than usual on the face (low insertion of the columella), resulting in a shortened area between the nose and the upper lip (philtrum). A high arch in the roof of the mouth (high-arched palate) and ear abnormalities may also occur in affected individuals.

---

Q: How many people are affected by 7q11.23 duplication syndrome ?
A: The prevalence of this disorder is estimated to be 1 in 7,500 to 20,000 people.

---

Q: What are the genetic changes related to 7q11.23 duplication syndrome ?
A: 7q11.23 duplication syndrome results from an extra copy of a region on the long (q) arm of chromosome 7 in each cell. This region is called the Williams-Beuren syndrome critical region (WBSCR) because its deletion causes a different disorder called Williams syndrome, also known as Williams-Beuren syndrome. The region, which is 1.5 to 1.8 million DNA base pairs (Mb) in length, includes 26 to 28 genes.  Extra copies of several of the genes in the duplicated region, including the ELN and GTF2I genes, likely contribute to the characteristic features of 7q11.23 duplication syndrome. Researchers suggest that an extra copy of the ELN gene in each cell may be related to the increased risk for aortic dilatation in 7q11.23 duplication syndrome. Studies suggest that an extra copy of the GTF2I gene may be associated with some of the behavioral features of the disorder. However, the specific causes of these features are unclear.  Researchers are studying additional genes in the duplicated region, but none have been definitely linked to any of the specific signs or symptoms of 7q11.23 duplication syndrome.

---

Q: Is 7q11.23 duplication syndrome inherited ?
A: 7q11.23 duplication syndrome is considered to be an autosomal dominant condition, which means one copy of chromosome 7 with the duplication in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most cases result from a duplication that occurs during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs and sperm) or in early fetal development. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Less commonly, an affected person inherits the chromosome with a duplicated segment from a parent.

---

Q: What are the treatments for 7q11.23 duplication syndrome ?
A: These resources address the diagnosis or management of 7q11.23 duplication syndrome:  - Cardiff University (United Kingdom): Copy Number Variant Research  - Gene Review: Gene Review: 7q11.23 Duplication Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Williams-Beuren region duplication syndrome  - University of Antwerp (Belgium): 7q11.23 Research Project  - University of Louisville: 7q11.23 Duplication Syndrome Research  - University of Toronto: 7q11.23 Duplication Syndrome Research   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care