Topic: Acrodermatitis enteropathica

Q: What is (are) Acrodermatitis enteropathica ?
A: Acrodermatitis enteropathica (AE) is a disorder of zinc metabolism that can either be inherited or acquired. Both forms lead to the inability to absorb zinc from the intestine. The lack of zinc can cause skin inflammation with a rash (pustular dermatitis) around the mouth and/or anus; diarrhea; and abnormal nails (nail dystrophy). Irritability and emotional disturbances can also occur. The inherited form is caused by mutations in the SLC39A4 gene and inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. The acquired form can result from diets lacking the appropriate amount of zinc. Supplemental zinc usually eliminates the symptoms of acrodermatitis enteropathica.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Acrodermatitis enteropathica ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Acrodermatitis enteropathica? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Acrodermatitis enteropathica. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal blistering of the skin 90% Abnormality of the eyebrow 90% Alopecia 90% Cerebral cortical atrophy 90% Diarrhea 90% Dry skin 90% Malabsorption 90% Pustule 90% Short stature 90% Abnormality of the fingernails 50% Abnormality of the toenails 50% Cheilitis 50% Furrowed tongue 50% Glossitis 50% Inflammatory abnormality of the eye 50% Photophobia 50% Skin ulcer 50% Anorexia 7.5% Corneal erosion 7.5% Visual impairment 7.5% Weight loss 7.5% Alopecia of scalp - Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Decreased taste sensation - Decreased testicular size - Decreased testosterone in males - Emotional lability - Failure to thrive - Hepatomegaly - Hypogonadism - Impaired T cell function - Infantile onset - Irritability - Lethargy - Low alkaline phosphatase - Paronychia - Poor appetite - Recurrent candida infections - Splenomegaly - Tremor - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.