Topic: ACTH-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia

Q: What are the symptoms of ACTH-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of ACTH-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for ACTH-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hypercortisolism 90% Round face 90% Thin skin 90% Truncal obesity 90% Abnormality of the menstrual cycle 50% Behavioral abnormality 50% Bruising susceptibility 50% Diabetes mellitus 50% Hypertension 50% Hypertrichosis 50% Muscle weakness 50% Nephrolithiasis 50% Reduced bone mineral density 50% Meningioma 7.5% Adult onset - Agitation - Anxiety - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Decreased circulating ACTH level - Depression - Increased circulating cortisol level - Kyphosis - Macronodular adrenal hyperplasia - Mental deterioration - Mood changes - Neoplasm - Osteopenia - Osteoporosis - Primary hypercorticolism - Psychosis - Skeletal muscle atrophy - Sporadic - Striae distensae - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.