Topic: Adenocarcinoma of the appendix

Q: What is (are) Adenocarcinoma of the appendix ?
A: Cancer of the appendix is very rare and is typically found incidentally during appendectomies, in about 1% of the cases. According to a report published by the National Cancer Institute, using the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database, appendix cancer account for about 0.4% of gastrointestinal tumors. There are several subytpes. The most common is the carcinoid type (66% of the total), with cyst-adenocarcinoma accounting for 20% and adenocarcinoma accounting for 10%. Then there are the rare forms of cancers which include adenocarcinoid, signet ring, non-Hodgkins lymphoma, ganglioneuroma, and pheochromocytoma. Benign primary tumors are mainly mucinous epithelial neoplasms, also called adenomas, cystadenoma, and benign neoplastic mucocele. Adenocarcinoma of the appendix is a epithelial cancer of the appendix. The term 'epithelium' refers to cells that line hollow organs and glands and those that make up the outer surface of the body. Epithelial cells help to protect or enclose organs. Some produce mucus or other secretions. Types of adenocarcinoma of the appendix include mucinous adenocarcinoma, non-mucinous adenocarcinoma, and signet cell carcinoma of appendix (which is the rarer involving only 4% of all the subtypes of appendix cancer).

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Adenocarcinoma of the appendix ?
A: What are the symptoms of adenocarcinoma of the appendix? The most common clinical symptom is acute appendicitis. Other symptoms include a palpable abdominal mass, ascites (fluid buildup), peritonitis (inflammation of the membrane lining the abdominal cavity) due to a perforated appendix, and non-specific gastrointestinal or genitourinary symptoms such as bloating, vague abdominal pain, and tenderness.

---

Q: How to diagnose Adenocarcinoma of the appendix ?
A: How might adenocarcinoma of the appendix be diagnosed? Adenocarcinoma of the appendix may be identified along with acute appendicitis. Mucinous adenocarcinomas may also be found incidentally as a right sided cystic mass on an imaging study.