Topic: Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy

Q: What is (are) Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy ?
A: Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy is a syndrome with a wide range of manifestations including short stature, obesity, round face, subcutaneous (under the skin) ossifications (gradual replacement of cartilage by bone), and characteristic shortening and widening of the bones in the hands and feet (brachydactyly). The features of Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy are associated with resistance to parathyroid hormone (pseudohypoparathyroidism) and to other hormones (thyroid-stimulation hormone, in particular). This autosomal dominantly inherited condition is caused by mutations in the GNAS gene. Treatment consists of calcium and vitamin D supplements.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy? Albright's hereditary osteodystophy is a genetic disorder that can cause many different symptoms. People with this disorder usually have short stature, obesity, round face, short bones in the hands and feet (brachydactyly), subcutaneous (under the skin) ossifications (replacement of cartilage by bone), and dimples on affected knuckles. Some people may have mild developmental delay. People with this disorder usually are resistant to parathyroid hormone (which is a condition called pseudohypoparathyroidism). This causes low levels of calcium in the bones and the blood. Low levels of calcium in the blood (hypocalcemia) can cause numbness, seizures, cataracts (cloudy lens in the eye), dental issues, and tetany (muscle twitches and hand and foot spasms). The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal joint morphology 90% Abnormality of calcium-phosphate metabolism 90% Cafe-au-lait spot 90% Gynecomastia 90% Hyperphosphatemia 90% Hyperthyroidism 90% Obesity 90% Precocious puberty 90% Round face 90% Skeletal dysplasia 90% Abnormality of the menstrual cycle 50% Abnormality of the penis 50% Coarse facial features 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Dry skin 50% Goiter 50% Scoliosis 50% Thin skin 50% Abnormality of the hip bone 7.5% Alopecia 7.5% Craniofacial hyperostosis 7.5% Hearing impairment 7.5% Neoplasm of the breast 7.5% Neoplasm of the thyroid gland 7.5% Polycystic ovaries 7.5% Recurrent fractures 7.5% Sarcoma 7.5% Testicular neoplasm 7.5% Visual impairment 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Basal ganglia calcification - Brachydactyly syndrome - Cataract - Choroid plexus calcification - Delayed eruption of teeth - Depressed nasal bridge - Elevated circulating parathyroid hormone (PTH) level - Full cheeks - Hypocalcemic tetany - Hypogonadism - Hypoplasia of dental enamel - Hypothyroidism - Intellectual disability - Low urinary cyclic AMP response to PTH administration - Nystagmus - Osteoporosis - Phenotypic variability - Pseudohypoparathyroidism - Seizures - Short finger - Short metacarpal - Short metatarsal - Short neck - Short stature - Short toe - Thickened calvaria - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy ?
A: What causes Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy? Albright's hereditary osteodystophy is caused by mutations in the GNAS gene. Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait. The hormone resistance associated with Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy, in particular resistance to parathyroid hormone, depends on whether the mutated allele comes from the father or the mother. Within a family, some patients have isolated features of Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy without hormone resistance (called pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism) and some show the complete clinical picture. This is due to parental imprinting of the GNAS gene. Thus, in individuals with a mutated maternal GNAS allele, the disease is fully expressed while in individuals with a mutated paternal allele the disease is partially expressed and hormone resistance is not present.

---

Q: Is Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy inherited ?
A: How is progressive osseous heteroplasia inherited? This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. People normally inherit one copy of each gene from their mother and one copy from their father. For most genes, both copies are active, or "turned on," in all cells. For a small subset of genes, however, only one of the two copies is active. For some of these genes, only the copy inherited from a person's father (the paternal copy) is active, while for other genes, only the copy inherited from a person's mother (the maternal copy) is active. These differences in gene activation based on the gene's parent of origin are caused by a phenomenon called genomic imprinting. The GNAS gene has a complex genomic imprinting pattern. In some cells of the body the maternal copy of the gene is active, while in others the paternal copy is active. Progressive osseous heteroplasia occurs when mutations affect the paternal copy of the gene. Thus, progressive heteroplasia is usually inherited from the father.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy ?
A: How might Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy be treated? Treatment with calcium and vitamin D supplements help maintain normal levels of calcium in the blood. If there are high levels of phosphate in the blood, it may be recommended to eat a low-phosphorous diet or take medications called phosphate binders to help lower the levels of phosphate. Examples of phosphate binders include calcium carbonate, calcium acetate, and sevelamer HCl.