Topic: Ambras syndrome

Q: What is (are) Ambras syndrome ?
A: Ambras syndrome is a very rare type of hypertrichosis lanuginosa congenita, a congenital skin disease characterized by excessive hair growth on the entire body, with the exception of the palms, soles, and mucous membranes. Individuals with Ambras syndrome have excessive growth of vellus (soft, fine and short) hair, especially on the face, ears, and shoulders. Facial and dental abnormalities may also be present. Ambras syndrome has been mapped to the short (q) arm of chromosome 8. It appears to follow an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Ambras syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Ambras syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Ambras syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Congenital, generalized hypertrichosis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.