Topic: Amyloidosis AA

Q: What is (are) Amyloidosis AA ?
A: Amyloidosis is a group of diseases in which a protein, called amyloid, builds up in the body's organs and tissues. Amyloidosis AA is also referred to as Secondary amyloidosis or Inflammatory amyloidosis. This disease is caused by a long-lasting infection or inflammatory disease such as rheumatoid arthritis, familial Mediterranean fever, or osteomyelitis. Infection or inflammation in the body causes an increased amount of a specific protein called serum amyloid A (SAA) protein. In this disease, part of the SAA protein forms deposits called "amyloid fibrils". These desposits occur in the space around the cells of certain tissues of the body. Amyloidosis AA usually begins as a disease in the kidneys, but other organs can be affected such as the liver and spleen. Medical or surgical treatment of the underlying infection or inflammatory disease can slow down or stop the progression of this condition.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Amyloidosis AA ?
A: What are the most current treatments for this disease? In amyloidosis AA, the treatment depends on the underlying disease. It is important to control the chronic infection or inflammatory disease which is responsible for the amyloid. Both surgery and medication can be used to achieve successful treatment outcomes for patients. Medscape Reference provides current and comprehensive information on medical treatment options for amyloidosis AA based on the underlying inflammatory disease or infection. Please visit the link below. You may need to register to view the article, but registration is free. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/335559-treatment#showall Kidney transplant is an important option in patients with amyloidosis AA in which stable control of the underlying disease has been achieved. However, appropriate patient selection is strongly recommended due to a higher incidence of heart failure and infections in AA individuals. Currently there is a clinical study on the safety and effectiveness of the medication KIACTA in preventing decline of renal function in patients with amyloidosis AA. CLICK HERE to learn more about this study including the six study locations within the United States.