Topic: Amyloidosis corneal

Q: What are the symptoms of Amyloidosis corneal ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Amyloidosis corneal? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Amyloidosis corneal. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Blurred vision - Childhood onset - Corneal dystrophy - Photophobia - Reduced visual acuity - Visual impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: How to diagnose Amyloidosis corneal ?
A: Is genetic testing available for lattice corneal dystrophy? Yes. GeneTests lists the names of laboratories that are performing genetic testing for lattice corneal dystrophy. Most of the laboratories listed through GeneTests do not accept direct contact from patients and their families; therefore, if you are interested in learning more, you will need to work with a health care provider or a genetics professional. To view the contact information for the clinical laboratories, conducting testing for lattice dystrophy type 1 and 3a click here. To access the contact information for the research laboratories performing genetic testing for lattice dystrophy type 3 click here.