Topic: Antisynthetase syndrome

Q: What is (are) Antisynthetase syndrome ?
A: Antisynthetase syndrome is a chronic autoimmune condition that affects the muscles and various other parts of the body. The signs and symptoms can vary but may include muscle inflammation (myositis), polyarthritis (inflammation of many joints), interstitial lung disease and Raynaud phenomenon. The exact underlying cause is unknown; however, the production of autoantibodies (antibodies that attack normal cells instead of disease-causing agents) that recognize and attack certain enzymes in the body called 'aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases' appears to be linked to the cause of the syndrome. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person but may include corticosteroids, immunosuppressive medications, and/or physical therapy.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Antisynthetase syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Antisynthetase syndrome? The signs and symptoms of antisynthetase syndrome vary but may include: Fever Loss of appetite Weight loss Muscle inflammation (myositis) Inflammation of multiple joints (polyarthritis) Interstitial lung disease (causing shortness of breath, coughing, and/or dysphagia) Mechanic's hands (thickened skin of tips and margins of the fingers) Raynaud phenomenon Some studies suggest that affected people may be at an increased risk for various types of cancer, as well. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Antisynthetase syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autoimmunity 90% Chest pain 90% Muscle weakness 90% Myalgia 90% Myositis 90% Pulmonary fibrosis 90% Respiratory insufficiency 90% Restrictive lung disease 90% Abnormality of temperature regulation 50% Acrocyanosis 50% Dry skin 50% Edema 50% EMG abnormality 50% Keratoconjunctivitis sicca 50% Lack of skin elasticity 50% Muscular hypotonia 50% Xerostomia 50% Abnormality of the aortic valve 7.5% Abnormality of the myocardium 7.5% Abnormality of the voice 7.5% Chondrocalcinosis 7.5% Feeding difficulties in infancy 7.5% Joint dislocation 7.5% Neoplasm 7.5% Pruritus 7.5% Pulmonary hypertension 7.5% Recurrent respiratory infections 7.5% Skin rash 7.5% Telangiectasia of the skin 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Antisynthetase syndrome ?
A: What causes antisynthetase syndrome? The exact underlying cause of antisynthetase syndrome is currently unknown. However, it is considered an autoimmune disease. Autoimmune disorders occur when the body's immune system attacks and destroys healthy body tissue by mistake. In antisynthetase syndrome, specifically, the production of autoantibodies (antibodies that attack normal cells instead of disease-causing agents) that recognize and attack certain enzymes in the body called 'aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases' appears to be linked to the cause of the syndrome. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases are involved in protein synthesis within the body. The exact role of autoantibodies in causation of antisynthetase syndrome is not yet known.

---

Q: How to diagnose Antisynthetase syndrome ?
A: How is antisynthetase syndrome diagnosed? A diagnosis of antisynthetase syndrome is often suspected based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms once other conditions that cause similar features have been ruled out. Additional testing can then be ordered to confirm the diagnosis, determine the severity of the condition, and inform treatment. This testing varies based on the signs and symptoms present in each person, but may include: Blood tests to evaluate levels of muscle enzymes such as creatine kinase and aldolase Laboratory tests to look for the presence of autoantibodies associated with antisynthetase syndrome High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the lungs Electromyography (EMG) Muscle biopsy Pulmonary function testing Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of affected muscles Evaluation of swallowing difficulties and aspiration risk Lung biopsy

---

Q: What are the treatments for Antisynthetase syndrome ?
A: What treatment is available for antisynthetase syndrome? Corticosteroids are typically the first-line of treatment and may be required for several months or years. These medications are often given orally; however, in severe cases, intravenous methylprednisolone may be prescribe initially. Immunosuppressive medications may also be recommended, especially in people with severe muscle weakness or symptomatic interstitial lung disease. Physical therapy is often necessary to improve weakness, reduce further muscle wasting from disuse, and prevent muscle contractures.