Topic: Aortic arch anomaly - peculiar facies - intellectual disability

Q: What are the symptoms of Aortic arch anomaly - peculiar facies - intellectual disability ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Aortic arch anomaly - peculiar facies - intellectual disability? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Aortic arch anomaly - peculiar facies - intellectual disability. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Broad forehead 90% Carious teeth 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Convex nasal ridge 90% Downturned corners of mouth 90% Facial asymmetry 90% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 90% Macrotia 90% Narrow mouth 90% Overriding aorta 90% Prominent nasal bridge 90% Triangular face 90% Arteriovenous malformation 50% Microcephaly 50% Abnormality of the hip bone 7.5% Behavioral abnormality 7.5% Genu varum 7.5% Hypoplasia of the zygomatic bone 7.5% Intrauterine growth retardation 7.5% Mandibular prognathia 7.5% Muscular hypotonia 7.5% Abnormal facial shape - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Intellectual disability - Right aortic arch with mirror image branching - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.