Topic: Autosomal recessive palmoplantar keratoderma and congenital alopecia

Q: What are the symptoms of Autosomal recessive palmoplantar keratoderma and congenital alopecia ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Autosomal recessive palmoplantar keratoderma and congenital alopecia? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal recessive palmoplantar keratoderma and congenital alopecia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the fingernails 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the skin 90% Atypical scarring of skin 90% Cataract 90% Lack of skin elasticity 90% Limitation of joint mobility 90% Palmoplantar keratoderma 90% Visual impairment 90% Alopecia totalis - Amniotic constriction ring - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Camptodactyly of finger - Congenital cataract - Dry skin - Facial erythema - Hyperkeratosis - Nail dysplasia - Nail dystrophy - Palmoplantar hyperkeratosis - Sclerodactyly - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.