Topic: Autosomal recessive optic atrophy, hearing loss, and peripheral neuropathy

Q: What is (are) Autosomal recessive optic atrophy, hearing loss, and peripheral neuropathy ?
A: Autosomal recessive optic atrophy, hearing loss, and peripheral neuropathy is a neurological condition described by Iwashita et al. in 1969 in a Korean brother and sister. This condition is characterized by variable degrees of hearing loss, distal weakness and loss of muscle tissue (atrophy) in the upper limbs, variable degrees of weakness and atrophy of the lower limbs, and optic atrophy with or without visual impairment. Autosomal recessive inheritance has been suggested.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Autosomal recessive optic atrophy, hearing loss, and peripheral neuropathy ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Autosomal recessive optic atrophy, hearing loss, and peripheral neuropathy? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal recessive optic atrophy, hearing loss, and peripheral neuropathy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Areflexia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Broad-based gait - Distal muscle weakness - Distal sensory impairment - Distal upper limb amyotrophy - Gait ataxia - Joint contracture of the hand - Optic atrophy - Pectus excavatum - Peripheral demyelination - Positive Romberg sign - Progressive sensorineural hearing impairment - Short thumb - Thoracic scoliosis - Ulnar deviation of the hand - Variable expressivity - Visual impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.