Topic: Autosomal dominant optic atrophy plus syndrome

Q: What are the symptoms of Autosomal dominant optic atrophy plus syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Autosomal dominant optic atrophy plus syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal dominant optic atrophy plus syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Impaired pain sensation 90% Optic atrophy 90% Sensorineural hearing impairment 90% Abnormality of color vision 50% Visual impairment 50% Abnormality of visual evoked potentials 7.5% Decreased nerve conduction velocity 7.5% Strabismus 7.5% Ataxia 5% Abnormal amplitude of pattern reversal visual evoked potentials - Abnormal auditory evoked potentials - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Central scotoma - Centrocecal scotoma - Horizontal nystagmus - Increased variability in muscle fiber diameter - Myopathy - Ophthalmoplegia - Peripheral neuropathy - Phenotypic variability - Progressive sensorineural hearing impairment - Ptosis - Red-green dyschromatopsia - Reduced visual acuity - Tritanomaly - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.