Topic: Barraquer-Simons syndrome

Q: What is (are) Barraquer-Simons syndrome ?
A: Barraquer-Simons syndrome, or acquired partial lipodystrophy, is characterized by the loss of fat from the face, neck, shoulders, arms, forearms, chest and abdomen. Occasionally the groin or thighs are also affected. Onset usually begins in childhood following a viral illness. It affects females more often than males. The fat loss usually has a 18 month course, but can come and go over the course of several years.  Following puberty, affected women may experience a disproportionate accumulation of fat in the hips and lower limbs. Around 1 in 5 people with this syndrome develop membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis. This kidney condition usually develops more than 10 years after the lipodystrophy's onset. Autoimmune disorders may also occur in association with this syndrome.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Barraquer-Simons syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Barraquer-Simons syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Barraquer-Simons syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Lipoatrophy 90% Abnormality of complement system 50% Autoimmunity 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Glomerulopathy 50% Hearing impairment 50% Hematuria 50% Lymphocytosis 50% Myopathy 50% Prematurely aged appearance 50% Proteinuria 50% Seizures 50% Arthralgia 7.5% Hepatic steatosis 7.5% Hypertrichosis 7.5% Insulin resistance 7.5% Abnormality of lipid metabolism - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Decreased serum complement C3 - Diabetes mellitus - Hirsutism - Juvenile onset - Loss of subcutaneous adipose tissue from upper limbs - Loss of truncal subcutaneous adipose tissue - Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis - Nephrotic syndrome - Phenotypic variability - Polycystic ovaries - Progressive loss of facial adipose tissue - Recurrent infections - Sporadic - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Barraquer-Simons syndrome ?
A: How might Barraquer-Simons syndrome be treated? Surgery may be used to improve a person's appearance, but is not needed for medical reasons. Facial reconstruction techniques may be used with varying success. These techniques may include transplantation of fat tissue, silicone implants, movement of facial muscles, or other techniques. No specific diet is recommended for people with Barraquer-Simons syndrome and weight gain should be avoided. Regular exercise is recommended to improve a person's metabolic status. If a person with Barraquer-Simons syndrome has kidney problems, then they may also need to be managed. Treatment may involving a special diet or medications. Dialysis or a kidney transplant may be needed if the condition progresses to kidney failure.