Topic: Bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria

Q: What is (are) Bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria ?
A: Bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria (BFPP) is a rare neurological disorder that affects the cerebral cortex (the outer surface of the brain). BFPP specifically affects the frontal and parietal lobes on both sides of the brain (bilateral). Signs and symptoms typically include moderate to severe intellectual disability, developmental delay, seizures, cerebellar ataxia, strabismus, and dysconjugate gaze (eyes that are not aligned). Some cases are caused by mutations in the GPR56 gene and are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria? The signs and symptoms of bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria vary but may include: Moderate to severe intellectual disability Developmental delay Seizures Dysconjugate gaze (eyes that are not aligned) Ataxia Strabismus Increased muscle tone Finger dysmetria (difficulty controlling speed, distance and/or power of movements) The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ankle clonus - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Babinski sign - Broad-based gait - Cerebellar hypoplasia - Cerebral dysmyelination - Esotropia - Exotropia - Frontoparietal polymicrogyria - Hyperreflexia - Hypertonia - Hypoplasia of the brainstem - Intellectual disability - Nystagmus - Polymicrogyria, anterior to posterior gradient - Seizures - Truncal ataxia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.