Topic: Blount disease

Q: What is (are) Blount disease ?
A: Blount disease is characterized by progressive bowing of the legs in infancy, early childhood, or adolescence. While it is not uncommon for young children to have bowed legs, typically the bowing improves with age. Blount disease is a condition that results from abnormal growth in the upper part of the shin bone (tibia) and requires treatment for improvement to occur. Treatment may involve bracing and/or surgery.  Other causes for Blount disease in young children includes metabolic disease and rickets. Blount disease in teens typically occurs in youth who are overweight. In teens surgery is often required to correct the problem.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Blount disease ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Blount disease? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Blount disease. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the metaphyses 90% Abnormality of the tibia 90% Abnormality of the proximal tibial epiphysis - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Genu varum - Osteochondrosis dissecans - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.