Topic: Brachydactyly type A2

Q: What are the symptoms of Brachydactyly type A2 ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Brachydactyly type A2? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Brachydactyly type A2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Brachydactyly syndrome 90% Clinodactyly of the 5th finger 50% Abnormality of the metacarpal bones 7.5% Short distal phalanx of finger 7.5% 2-3 toe syndactyly - Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the middle phalanges of the toes - Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the middle phalanx of the 2nd finger - Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the middle phalanx of the 5th finger - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Bracket epiphysis of the middle phalanx of the 2nd finger - Bracket epiphysis of the middle phalanx of the 5th finger - Broad hallux - Hallux valgus - Medially deviated second toe - Radial deviation of the 2nd finger - Short 2nd finger - Short hallux - Short middle phalanx of the 5th finger - Short stature - Triangular shaped middle phalanx of the 2nd finger - Triangular shaped middle phalanx of the 5th finger - Ulnar deviation of the 2nd finger - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.