Topic: BRCA2 hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome

Q: What is (are) BRCA2 hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome ?
A: BRCA2 hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome (BRCA2 HBOC) is an inherited condition that is characterized by an increased risk for a variety of different cancers. Women with this condition have a 49-55% risk of developing breast cancer, a 16-18% risk of developing ovarian cancer and a 62% risk of developing contralateral breast cancer by age 70. Men have a 6% lifetime risk of breast cancer and an increased risk for prostate cancer. Both men and women with BRCA2 HBOC have an elevated risk for pancreatic cancer. BRCA2 HBOC may also be associated with cancers of the stomach, gallbladder, bile duct, esophagus, stomach, fallopian tube, primary peritoneum, and skin; however, these risks are not well defined. This condition is caused by changes (mutations) in the BRCA2 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Management may include high risk cancer screening, chemopreventation and/or prophylactic surgeries.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of BRCA2 hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of BRCA2 hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for BRCA2 hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Breast carcinoma - Multifactorial inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.