Topic: Brooks Wisniewski Brown syndrome

Q: What are the symptoms of Brooks Wisniewski Brown syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Brooks Wisniewski Brown syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Brooks Wisniewski Brown syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Developmental regression 5% Agenesis of corpus callosum - Blepharophimosis - Bulbous nose - Cerebral atrophy - Cupped ear - Decreased muscle mass - Deeply set eye - Delayed speech and language development - Depressed nasal bridge - EEG abnormality - Epicanthus inversus - Esotropia - Flexion contracture - Hyperactivity - Hyperreflexia - Increased serum lactate - Intellectual disability, progressive - Intellectual disability, severe - Low posterior hairline - Low-set ears - Microcephaly - Myopia - Narrow mouth - Nystagmus - Optic atrophy - Pectus excavatum - Poor coordination - Posteriorly rotated ears - Protruding ear - Seizures - Severe postnatal growth retardation - Short palpebral fissure - Short stature - Small for gestational age - Spastic diplegia - Tapered finger - Triangular face - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.