Topic: Brown syndrome

Q: What is (are) Brown syndrome ?
A: Brown syndrome is an eye disorder characterized by abnormalities in the eye's ability to move. Specifically, the ability to look up and in is affected by a problem in the superior oblique muscle/tendon. The condition may be present at birth (congenital) or it may develop following surgery or as a result of inflammation or a problem with development. Some cases are constant while other are intermittent. Treatment depends upon the cause and severity of the movement disorder. Options include close observation, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents like Ibuprofen, corticosteroids, and surgery.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Brown syndrome ?
A: How might Brown syndrome be treated? Treatment recommendations vary depending on the cause and severity of the condition. In mild cases, a watch and wait approach may be sufficient. Visual acuity should be monitored. First line therapy usually involves less invasive options such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications like Ibuprofen.  Acquired cases of inflammatory Brown syndrome may be successfully treated with corticosteroids. Surgery is considered in cases which present with double vision, compromised binocular vision, significant abnormalities in head position or obvious eye misalignment when looking straight ahead.  You can find additional information regarding treatment of Brown syndrome through PubMed, a searchable database of biomedical journal articles. Although not all of the articles are available for free online, most articles listed in PubMed have a summary available. To obtain the full article, contact a medical/university library or your local library for interlibrary loan. You can also order articles online through the publishers Web site. Using 'brown syndrome [ti] AND treatment' as your search term should help you locate articles. Use the advanced search feature to narrow your search results. Click here to view a search. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed The National Library of Medicine (NLM) Web site has a page for locating libraries in your area that can provide direct access to these journals (print or online). The Web page also describes how you can get these articles through interlibrary loan and Loansome Doc (an NLM document-ordering service). You can access this page at the following link http://nnlm.gov/members/. You can also contact the NLM toll-free at 888-346-3656 to locate libraries in your area.