Topic: Catamenial pneumothorax

Q: What is (are) Catamenial pneumothorax ?
A: Catamenial pneumothorax is an extremely rare condition that affects women. Pneumothorax is the medical term for a collapsed lung, a condition in which air or gas is trapped in the space surrounding the lungs causing the lungs to collapse. Women with catamenial pneumothorax have recurrent episodes of pneumothorax that occur within 72 hours before or after the start of menstruation. The exact cause of catamenial pneumothorax is unknown and several theories have been proposed. Many cases are associated with the abnormal development of endometrial tissue outside of the uterus (endometriosis). Some believe that catamenial pneumothorax is the most common form of thoracic endometriosis (a condition in which the endometrial tissue grows in or around the lungs). A diagnosis of catamenial pneumothorax is usually suspected when a woman of reproductive age and with endometriosis has episodes of pneumothorax. Treatment is with hormones and surgery.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Catamenial pneumothorax ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Catamenial pneumothorax? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Catamenial pneumothorax. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Decreased fertility - Dysmenorrhea - Endometriosis - Multifactorial inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Catamenial pneumothorax ?
A: What causes catamenial pneumothorax? The exact cause is not known. However, spontaneous collapse of the lung (pneumothorax) occurs in 72% to 73% of cases of thoracic endometriosis. Thoracic endometriosis is a condition in which endometrial tissue is present in the chest (thoracic) cavity. It is more often seen in women who are about 34 years old. Thoracic endometriosis can be found in most cases of catamenial pneumothorax. Pneumothorax associated with endometriosis may also occur without being related with menstruation (non-catamenial pneumothorax) even in cases with no symptoms or without diagnosis of pelvic endometriosis.

---

Q: How to diagnose Catamenial pneumothorax ?
A: How might catamenial pneumothorax be diagnosed? The diagnosis should be suspected in women of reproductive age who have several episodes of spontaneous lung collapse (pneumothoraces) and have endometriosis. Medical thoracoscopy or video-assisted thoracoscopy may confirm the diagnosis.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Catamenial pneumothorax ?
A: How might catamenial pneumothorax be treated? Treatment of choice is with surgery, with video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS). Conventional thoracotomy may be occasionally necessary, particularly in repeat operations. It is very important to examine the large, thin tissue lining around the outside of the lungs and the inside of the chest cavity (pleura).  Hormonal treatment with surgery prevents the repeat of catamenial and/or endometriosis-related pneumothorax. Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) for 6 to 12 months after the surgery is also often recommended.