Topic: Chandler's syndrome

Q: What is (are) Chandler's syndrome ?
A: Chandler's syndrome is a rare eye disorder in which the single layer of cells lining the interior of the cornea proliferates, causing changes within the iris, corneal swelling, and unusually high pressure in the eye (glaucoma). This condition is one of three syndromes, along with progressive iris atrophy and Cogan-Reese syndrome, that make up the iridocorneal endothelial (ICE) syndrome. In most cases, only one eye is affected. Symptoms may include reduced vision and pain. Chandler's syndrome more often affects females and usually presents sometime during middle age. The cause of this disease is unknown.

---

Q: What causes Chandler's syndrome ?
A: What causes Chandler's syndrome? The underlying cause of Chandler's syndrome is unknown. Some researchers suspect that inflammation or chronic viral infection may play a role in the development of this condition.  Chandler's syndrome develops when the endothelium, the single layer of cells lining the inside of the surface of the cornea, fails to pump the aqueous humor from the cornea. This allows fluid to accumulate in the cornea (corneal edema), leading to blurred vision.

---

Q: Is Chandler's syndrome inherited ?
A: Is Chandler's syndrome inherited? While the cause of Chandler's syndrome is unknown, at this time there is no evidence that it is inherited (hereditary).

---

Q: What are the treatments for Chandler's syndrome ?
A: How might Chandler's syndrome be treated? While it is not possible to halt the progression of Chandler's syndrome, the glaucoma associated with this disease can be treated with medications and/or filtering surgery. Eye drops used in managing glaucoma decrease pressure in the eye by helping the eye's fluid drain more efficiently and/or decreasing the amount of fluid made by the eye. Drugs used to treat glaucoma are classified according to their active ingredient. These include prostaglandin analogs, beta blockers, alpha agonists, and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. Combination drugs may be necessary for some patients. If these medications do not successfully treat the glaucoma, surgery may be indicated. Trabeculectomy may be used to treat glaucoma. In some cases, multiple procedures may be necessary. The corneal swelling associated with Chandler's syndrome may be treated through a cornea transplant. Further investigation is needed to determine the best way to manage this condition.