Topic: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2B

Q: What is (are) Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2B ?
A: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2B (CMT2B) affects the peripheral nerves, the nerves running from outside the brain and spine. Common signs and symptoms include slowly progressive weakness and numbness in the feet, lower leg muscles, hands, and forearms. This type of CMT is also associated with the formation of ulcers in the hands and feet. Symptoms may start in childhood to early adulthood, although later onset (>50 years) has also been described. Symptoms of CMT2B vary but tend to be similar to that of CMT type 1. CMT2B is caused by changes in the RAB7A gene. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2B ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2B? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2B. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Areflexia - Autoamputation (feet) - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Axonal degeneration/regeneration - Decreased motor nerve conduction velocity - Decreased number of peripheral myelinated nerve fibers - Distal amyotrophy - Dystrophic toenail - Foot dorsiflexor weakness - Hammertoe - Hyporeflexia - Osteomyelitis or necrosis, distal, due to sensory neuropathy (feet) - Peripheral axonal atrophy - Pes cavus - Pes planus - Steppage gait - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.