Topic: Chilaiditi syndrome

Q: What is (are) Chilaiditi syndrome ?
A: Chilaiditi syndrome is a medical condition in which a portion of the colon is abnormally positioned between the liver and the diaphragm. Symptoms vary, but may include abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and small bowel obstruction. In many cases, there are no symptoms and the interposition is an incidental finding. When no symptoms are present, the clinical finding is called Chilaiditi's sign.. The underlying cause of Chilaiditi syndrome is unknown. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Chilaiditi syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Chilaiditi syndrome? The symptoms of Chilaiditi syndrome vary. Chronic recurrent abdominal pain is a common finding. Other symptoms might include nausea, vomiting, constipation, indigestion, difficulty swallowing, and abdominal tenderness, especially in the upper, central area. In some cases, breathing problems may develop.

---

Q: What causes Chilaiditi syndrome ?
A: What causes Chilaiditi syndrome? The exact cause of Chilaiditi syndrome is unknown. The condition appears to occur with higher frequency among individuals with chronic lung disease, scarring of the liver (cirrhosis), and in those with an accumulation of ascites in the abdomen. Other risk factors may include reduced liver volume, paralysis of the motor nerve to the diaphragm (phrenic nerve palsy), and obesity. In some cases, the condition is present from birth (congenital).

---

Q: What are the treatments for Chilaiditi syndrome ?
A: How might Chilaiditi syndrome be treated? Treatment of Chilaiditi syndrome is directed at the individual symptoms present. In some cases, treatment is not needed. Reducing (or removing) the pressure within the abdomen may help alleviate symptoms. This may be achieved through conservative measure that address constipation, pain and distention. Surgical intervention may include removal of a portion of the color or the anchoring of the liver to the abdominal wall.