Topic: Cholesteatoma

Q: What is (are) Cholesteatoma ?
A: Cholesteatoma is a type of skin cyst located in the middle ear. It can be congenital (present from birth), but it more commonly occurs as a complication of chronic ear infection. The hallmark symptom is a painless discharge from the ear. Hearing loss, dizziness, and facial muscle paralysis are rare but can result from continued cholesteatoma growth. Surgery can stop infections and prevent complications.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Cholesteatoma ?
A: What symptoms are associated with cholesteatoma? Early symptoms may include drainage from the ear, sometimes with a foul odor. As the cholesteatoma cyst or sac enlarges, it can lead to a full feeling or pressure in the ear, hearing loss, dizziness and pain, numbness or muscle weakness on one side of the face. On examination, the ear drum (tympanic membrane) appears abnormal. In rare cases, a cholesteatoma may erode through the tegmen, allowing an epidural abscess to form which could lead to a more serious brain infection.

---

Q: What causes Cholesteatoma ?
A: What causes cholesteatoma? A cholesteatoma usually occurs because of poor eustachian tube function in conjunction with infection in the middle ear. Negative pressure within the middle ear pulls a part of the eardrum the wrong way, creating a sac or cyst that fills with old skin cells and other waste material. As the cyst gets bigger, some of the middle ear bones break down, affecting hearing. A rare congenital form of cholesteatoma (one present at birth) can occur in the middle ear and elsewhere, such as in the nearby skull bones.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Cholesteatoma ?
A: How might cholesteatoma be treated? An examination by an otolaryngologist - a doctor who specializes in head and neck conditions -  can confirm the presence of a cholesteatoma. Initial treatment may consist of a careful cleaning of the ear, antibiotics, and eardrops. Therapy aims to stop drainage in the ear by controlling the infection. Large or complicated cholesteatomas may require surgical treatment to protect the patient from serious complications.