Topic: Chondrodysplasia punctata 1, X-linked recessive

Q: What is (are) Chondrodysplasia punctata 1, X-linked recessive ?
A: Chondrodysplasia punctata 1, X-linked recessive (CDPX1) is a genetic disorder present from birth that affects bone and cartilage development. On x-ray, affected infants have characteristic spots at the ends of their bones. These spots are called chondrodysplasia punctata or stippled epiphyses and typically disappear between age 2 and 3. Additional common features of CDPX1 are shortened fingers and a flat nose. Some people with this condition have breathing abnormalities, hearing loss, abnormalities of the spinal bones in the neck, and delayed intellectual development. CDPX1 is caused by changes in the ARSE gene, which is located on the X chromosome. This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive manner and occurs almost exclusively in males. Most affected individuals have a normal lifespan, although some individuals experience complications that can be life-threatening.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Chondrodysplasia punctata 1, X-linked recessive ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Chondrodysplasia punctata 1, X-linked recessive? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Chondrodysplasia punctata 1, X-linked recessive. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the vertebral column - Anosmia - Cataract - Depressed nasal bridge - Epiphyseal stippling - Hearing impairment - Hypogonadism - Ichthyosis - Microcephaly - Short distal phalanx of finger - Short nasal septum - Short nose - Short stature - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.