Topic: Chromosome 1q41-q42 deletion syndrome

Q: What is (are) Chromosome 1q41-q42 deletion syndrome ?
A: Chromosome 1q41-q42 deletion syndrome is characterized by a small, but variable deletion in a particular place on the long arm of one copy of chromosome 1, usually spanning several genes. There have been variable features described in the literature, and individuals have ranged from being mildly to severely affected. Features may include poor feeding in infancy; developmental delay including delayed or absent speech; and moderate to severe intellectual disability. Other features may include hypotonia; short stature; seizures; heart defects; structural brain anomalies (most commonly underdevelopment of the corpus callosum); genitourinary abnormalities; cleft palate; microcephaly; vision problems; hearing loss; and other abnormalities. Some may have characteristic facial features. Researchers have suggested the features are caused by disruption of several genes. This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner; although most cases do not have a family history of this condition.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Chromosome 1q41-q42 deletion syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Chromosome 1q41-q42 deletion syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Chromosome 1q41-q42 deletion syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Anteverted nares - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cleft palate - Cleft upper lip - Coarse facial features - Congenital diaphragmatic hernia - Cryptorchidism - Deeply set eye - Depressed nasal bridge - Frontal bossing - Holoprosencephaly - Hypotelorism - Intellectual disability - Microcephaly - Microphthalmia - Microtia - Phenotypic variability - Preauricular skin tag - Seizures - Short stature - Talipes equinovarus - Upslanted palpebral fissure - Vertebral segmentation defect - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.