Topic: Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia

Q: What is (are) Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia ?
A: Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO) is a condition characterized mainly by a loss of the muscle functions involved in eye and eyelid movement. Signs and symptoms tend to begin in early adulthood and most commonly include weakness or paralysis of the muscles that move the eye (ophthalmoplegia) and drooping of the eyelids (ptosis). Some affected individuals also have general weakness of the skeletal muscles (myopathy), which may be especially noticeable during exercise. Muscle weakness may also cause difficulty swallowing (dysphagia). CPEO can be caused by mutations in any of several genes, which may be located in mitochondrial DNA or nuclear DNA. It has different inheritance patterns depending on the gene involved in the affected individual. CPEO can occur as part of other underlying conditions, such as ataxia neuropathy spectrum and Kearns-Sayre syndrome. These conditions may not only involve CPEO, but various additional features that are not shared by most individuals with CPEO.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia? The signs and symptoms of chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO) typically begin in young adults between the ages of 18 and 40. The most common symptoms in affected individuals include drooping eyelids (ptosis) and weakness or paralysis of the eye muscles (ophthalmoplegia). The condition may be unilateral (affecting one eye) or bilateral (affecting both eyes). Some affected individuals also have weakness of the skeletal muscles (myopathy), specifically of the arms, legs, and/or neck. This may be especially noticeable during exercise. Muscle weakness may also cause difficulty swallowing (dysphagia). Sometimes, CPEO may be associated with other signs and symptoms. In these cases, the condition is referred to as "progressive external ophthalmoplegia plus" (PEO+). Additional signs and symptoms can include hearing loss caused by nerve damage in the inner ear (sensorineural hearing loss), weakness and loss of sensation in the limbs due to nerve damage (neuropathy), impaired muscle coordination (ataxia), a pattern of movement abnormalities known as parkinsonism, or depression. CPEO can also occur as part of other underlying conditions such as Kearns-Sayre syndrome. These conditions may not only involve CPEO, but various additional features that are not shared by most individuals with CPEO. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Adult onset - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Bradykinesia - Cataract - Decreased activity of cytochrome C oxidase in muscle tissue - Depression - Dysarthria - Dysphagia - EMG: myopathic abnormalities - Exercise intolerance - Facial palsy - Gait ataxia - Gastroparesis - Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism - Hyporeflexia - Impaired distal proprioception - Impaired distal vibration sensation - Increased serum lactate - Increased variability in muscle fiber diameter - Limb muscle weakness - Multiple mitochondrial DNA deletions - Muscle fiber necrosis - Parkinsonism with favorable response to dopaminergic medication - Pes cavus - Phenotypic variability - Premature ovarian failure - Primary amenorrhea - Progressive - Progressive external ophthalmoplegia - Progressive muscle weakness - Ptosis - Ragged-red muscle fibers - Resting tremor - Rigidity - Secondary amenorrhea - Sensorineural hearing impairment - Sensory axonal neuropathy - Skeletal muscle atrophy - Subsarcolemmal accumulations of abnormally shaped mitochondria - Testicular atrophy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: Is Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia inherited ?
A: Is chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia inherited? Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO) can be inherited, or it can occur sporadically (due to a new mutation in an individual with no history of the condition in the family). CPEO is considered a "mitochondrial disorder." This is because all the genetic mutations that can cause CPEO ultimately result in dysfunction of the mitochondria, which are structures in our cells that produce energy required for normal cell function. While most of our DNA is located in the cell's center (nuclear DNA), some of our DNA is located within the mitochondria (mitochondrial DNA). CPEO can be caused by mutations in any of several genes, which may be located in mitochondrial DNA or nuclear DNA. It has different inheritance patterns depending on the gene involved in the affected individual. Unlike nuclear DNA which is inherited from both the mother and the father, mitochondrial DNA is inherited from only the mother. In CPEO, the affected mitochondria (i.e., the ones carrying the mutations) are found only in the skeletal muscle cells. These mitochondrial DNA mutations are almost always sporadic (occurring by chance for the first time in the affected individual). Nuclear gene mutations that cause CPEO may be inherited in an autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant manner, depending on the gene involved. The risk for other family members to be affected depends on the genetic cause and the inheritance pattern in the family.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia ?
A: How might chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia be treated? Ptosis caused by chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO) can be corrected by surgery, or by using glasses that have a ptosis crutch to lift the upper eyelids. Strabismus surgery can be helpful in carefully selected patients if diplopia (double vision) occurs. Some individuals with a deficiency of coenzyme Q10 have CPEO as an associated abnormality. Coenzyme Q10 is important for normal mitochondrial function. In individuals with this deficiency, supplemental coenzyme Q10 has been found to improve general neurologic function and exercise tolerance. However, coenzyme Q10 has not been shown to improve the ophthalmoplegia or ptosis in people who have isolated CPEO.