Topic: Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy

Q: What is (are) Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy ?
A: Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) is a neurological disorder that causes progressive weakness and impaired sensory function in the legs and arms. Symptoms often include tingling or numbness (first in the toes and fingers); weakness of the arms and legs; loss of deep tendon reflexes; fatigue; and abnormal sensations. CIDP is thought to be caused by an abnormal immune response in which the immune system mistakenly attacks and damages the myelin sheath (the covering that protects nerve fibers) of the peripheral nerves. CIDP is closely related to Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) and is considered the "chronic counterpart" of GBS. Treatment may include corticosteroids, immunosuppressant drugs, plasma exchange, physiotherapy, and/or intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Acute demyelinating polyneuropathy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy ?
A: What causes chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP)? The exact underlying cause of CIDP is unknown, but there is evidence to support that it is related to the immune system and may have multiple triggers. It is thought to be caused by an abnormal immune response in which the immune system mistakenly attacks and damages the myelin sheath (the covering that protects nerve fibers) of the peripheral nerves. However, no specific provoking antigens or other predisposing factors for CIDP have been identified. In several case reports, treatment with tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibitors has been associated with the subsequent development of chronic demyelinating neuropathies.

---

Q: Is Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy inherited ?
A: Is chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) inherited? CIDP is not known to be inherited and is considered an acquired disorder. No clear genetic predisposition or other predisposing factors for CIDP have been identified.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy ?
A: How might chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) be treated? The standard therapies for CIDP appear to be equally effective and include: intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) - adds large numbers of antibodies to the blood plasma to reduce the effect of the antibodies that are causing the problem glucocorticoids - help reduce inflammation and relieve symptoms plasma exchange - remove antibodies from the blood The treatment choice is influenced by the preference of the affected person, side effects, treatment cost, duration, ease of administration, and availability. Advantages and disadvantages of standard therapies may include the following: IVIG and plasma exchange may lead to a more rapid improvement in CIDP than glucocorticoid therapy, but are less likely than glucocorticoids to produce a remission IVIG is expensive, and its supply is sometimes limited Glucocorticoids are inexpensive, but chronic use is limited by common and important side effects Plasma exchange is expensive, invasive, and available only at specialized centers Other medications that suppress the immune system (immunosuppressants) may also be used. Physiotherapy may improve muscle strength, function and mobility.