Topic: Chromosome 16p13.3 deletion syndrome

Q: What is (are) Chromosome 16p13.3 deletion syndrome ?
A: Chromosome 16p13.3 deletion syndrome is a chromosome abnormality that can affect many parts of the body. People with this condition are missing a small piece (deletion) of chromosome 16 at a location designated p13.3. Although once thought to be a severe form of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, it is now emerging as a unique syndrome. Signs and symptoms may include failure to thrive, hypotonia (reduced muscle tone), short stature, microcephaly (unusually small head), characteristic facial features, mild to moderate intellectual disability, serious organ anomalies (i.e. heart and/or kidney problems), and vulnerability to infections. Chromosome testing of both parents can provide more information on whether or not the deletion was inherited. In most cases, parents do not have any chromosomal anomaly. However, sometimes one parent has a balanced translocation where a piece of a chromosome has broken off and attached to another one with no gain or loss of genetic material. The balanced translocation normally does not cause any signs or symptoms, but it increases the risk for having an affected child with a chromosomal anomaly like a deletion. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. To learn more about chromosomal anomalies in general, please visit our GARD webpage on Chromosome Disorders.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Chromosome 16p13.3 deletion syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Chromosome 16p13.3 deletion syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Chromosome 16p13.3 deletion syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal facial shape - Abnormality of the hairline - Abnormality of the kidney - Autosomal dominant contiguous gene syndrome - Broad hallux - Broad thumb - Clinodactyly of the 5th finger - Convex nasal ridge - Death in infancy - Facial hemangioma - Facial hypertrichosis - Failure to thrive - Feeding difficulties in infancy - High palate - Hypoplastic left heart - Intellectual disability - Low hanging columella - Microcephaly - Muscular hypotonia - Myopia - Nevus sebaceous - Obesity - Polysplenia - Prominent nose - Recurrent infections - Scoliosis - Seizures - Sleep disturbance - Somatic mosaicism - Strabismus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.