Topic: Chronic active Epstein-Barr virus infection

Q: What is (are) Chronic active Epstein-Barr virus infection ?
A: Chronic active Epstein-Barr virus infection is a rare condition in which the body makes too many lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Lymphocytes are an important part of the immune system because they help fight off diseases and protect the body from infection. About 95% of adults are infected with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Most infections occur during childhood and do not cause any symptoms. EBV infection in adolescents or young adults can often result in infectious mononucleosis.  Rarely, people infected with EBV develop a life-threatening condition called chronic active EBV virus (CAEBV). Patients with CAEBV most often have fever, liver dysfunction, an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly), swollen lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy), and low numbers of platelets (thrombocytopenia). Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation has shown promise in the treatment of CAEBV.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Chronic active Epstein-Barr virus infection ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Chronic active Epstein-Barr virus infection? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Chronic active Epstein-Barr virus infection. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Bronchiectasis - Fever - Pneumonia - Sinusitis - Splenomegaly - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.