Topic: Cramp-fasciculation syndrome

Q: What is (are) Cramp-fasciculation syndrome ?
A: Cramp-fasciculation syndrome (CFS) is a rare condition of the muscles. Affected people have persistent muscle twitching (fasciculations) and cramping, which can lead to muscle discomfort, pain, or tiredness. Muscles in the leg are most commonly affected, although this condition may involve several parts of the body. Symptoms are thought to be due to overactivity of the associated nerves. In most cases, CFS occurs sporadically in people with no family history of the condition. There is limited information about the treatment of CFS, but certain medications have been reported as beneficial in individual cases.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Cramp-fasciculation syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of cramp-fasciculation syndrome? Cramp-fasciculation syndrome (CFS) is primarily associated with severe muscle cramps and muscle twitches occurring in otherwise healthy people. These symptoms are often triggered by physical activity and may be relieved by stretching exercises and/or masssage. Muscles in the thighs and calves are most commonly affected, although other muscles (i.e. arm, chest) can also be involved. The severity of the condition varies significantly. In severe cases, CFS can interfere with daily activities (i.e. work, household chores) and quality of life.

---

Q: What causes Cramp-fasciculation syndrome ?
A: What causes cramp-fasciculation syndrome? In many cases, the exact underlying cause of cramp-fasciculation syndrome (CFS) is unknown (idiopathic). In general, it is thought to be related to abnormal excitability (overactivity) of peripheral neurons. Some cases of CFS are associated with: Genetic disorders Autoimmune conditions Peripheral neuropathy Anterior-horn-cell disease Metabolic abnormalities

---

Q: How to diagnose Cramp-fasciculation syndrome ?
A: How is cramp-fasciculation syndrome diagnosed?  A diagnosis of cramp-fasciculation syndrome is generally based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. Namely, a history of frequent muscle cramps, twitching, and pain (often worsened by exercise) without muscle weakness or wasting is suggestive of the condition. It is also important to rule out other conditions that may cause similar features. Electromyography (EMG) or repetitive nerve stimulation studies may also be done to assess the health of muscles and the nerves that control them. In repetitive nerve stimulation studies, muscle responses are recorded when the nerves are repetitively stimulated by small pulses of electricity.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Cramp-fasciculation syndrome ?
A: How might cramp-fasciculation syndrome be treated? There is limited information in the medical literature about the treatment of cramp-fasciculation syndrome (CFS). Much of what is available describes individual cases. Some people with CFS improve without treatment. Treatment with carbamazepine, gabapentin, or pregabalin (medications that reduce the hyper-excitability of nerves) was described as helpful in improving symptoms in individual cases. Immunosuppressive therapy (e.g., prednisone) has been used to treat cases of CFS that did not respond to other treatments. For severe cases, additional treatment options may be considered. Decisions regarding treatment should be carefully considered and discussed with a knowledgeable healthcare provider.