Topic: Deafness with labyrinthine aplasia microtia and microdontia (LAMM)

Q: What are the symptoms of Deafness with labyrinthine aplasia microtia and microdontia (LAMM) ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Deafness with labyrinthine aplasia microtia and microdontia (LAMM)? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Deafness with labyrinthine aplasia microtia and microdontia (LAMM). If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the cranial nerves 90% Microdontia 90% Abnormality of the nares 50% Long face 50% Pointed chin 50% Wide nasal bridge 50% Abnormal nasal morphology 7.5% Anterior creases of earlobe 7.5% Hypermetropia 7.5% Hypertelorism 7.5% Increased number of teeth 7.5% Preauricular skin tag 7.5% Reduced number of teeth 7.5% Strabismus 7.5% Synophrys 7.5% Tall stature 7.5% Anteverted ears - Aplasia of the inner ear - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Conical tooth - Delayed gross motor development - Microtia, first degree - Profound sensorineural hearing impairment - Skin tags - Widely spaced teeth - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.