Topic: Deafness, epiphyseal dysplasia, short stature

Q: What are the symptoms of Deafness, epiphyseal dysplasia, short stature ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Deafness, epiphyseal dysplasia, short stature? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Deafness, epiphyseal dysplasia, short stature. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hearing impairment 90% Short stature 90% Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Hyperlordosis 50% Lacrimation abnormality 50% Myopia 50% Pointed chin 50% Short neck 50% Short thorax 50% Triangular face 50% Umbilical hernia 50% Brachydactyly syndrome 7.5% Frontal bossing 7.5% Neurological speech impairment 7.5% Retinal detachment 7.5% Abnormality of femoral epiphysis - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Growth delay - Inguinal hernia - Intellectual disability, moderate - Lacrimal duct stenosis - Sensorineural hearing impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.