Topic: Dent disease 1

Q: What is (are) Dent disease 1 ?
A: Dent disease type 1 is a kidney disease seen mostly in males. The most frequent sign of Dent disease is the presence of an abnormally large amount of protein in the urine (proteinuria). Other common signs of the disorder include excess calcium in the urine (hypercalciuria), calcium deposits in the kidney (nephrocalcinosis), and kidney stones (nephrolithiasis). In many males with Dent disease, progressive kidney problems lead to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in early to mid-adulthood. ESRD ia a failure of kidney function that occurs when the kidneys are no longer able to effectively filter fluids and waste products from the body. Disease severity can vary even among members of the same family. Dent disease type 1 is inherited in an X-linked recessive manner. Approximately 60% of individuals with Dent disease 1 have a mutation in the CLCN5 gene which is located on the X chromosome. Due to random X-chromosome inactivation, some female carriers may manifest hypercalciuria and, rarely, proteinuria.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Dent disease 1 ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Dent disease 1? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Dent disease 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aminoaciduria - Bone pain - Bowing of the legs - Bulging epiphyses - Chronic kidney disease - Delayed epiphyseal ossification - Enlargement of the ankles - Enlargement of the wrists - Femoral bowing - Fibular bowing - Glycosuria - Hypercalciuria - Hyperphosphaturia - Hypophosphatemia - Increased serum 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 - Low-molecular-weight proteinuria - Metaphyseal irregularity - Microscopic hematuria - Nephrocalcinosis - Nephrolithiasis - Osteomalacia - Phenotypic variability - Proximal tubulopathy - Recurrent fractures - Renal phosphate wasting - Rickets - Short stature - Sparse bone trabeculae - Thin bony cortex - Tibial bowing - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.