Topic: Disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis

Q: What is (are) Disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis ?
A: Disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis (DPL) is a rare condition which is characterized by nodules or small lumps of smooth muscle cells located on the peritoneum (lining of the abdominal wall) and abdominal organs.The condition is usually benign (noncancerous) but in rare cases has become cancerous. Although it can be seen in post-menopausal women and very rarely in men, DPL occurs most often in women of childbearing age. Most women with DPL are pregnant, taking the birth control pill, or have uterine leioyomas or estrogen-secreting tumors. Some people with DPL have no signs or symptoms of the condition. When present, symptoms may include abdominal and pelvic pain; rectal or vaginal bleeding; and less commonly constipation. The cause of DPL is unknown but may be linked to hormonal and genetic factors. Some cases of DPL resolve when hormone levels are returned to normal. However, surgery may be suggested based on the size and location of the tumor.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis (DPL)? Disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis (DPL) often does not produce any symptoms. When symptoms do occur, they may include: Abdominal and pelvic pain which is often associated with abnormal menstrual bleeding (dysmenorrhia) Rectal bleeding Abnormally heavy bleeding during menstruation (menorrhagia) Constipation Intestinal obstruction DPL may be discovered incidentally during a physical exam when masses may be felt in the abdomen. Since DPL usually does not produce any symptoms, the condition may also be unexpectedly found during a cesarean section (C-section) or abdominal surgery of another reason.

---

Q: What causes Disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis ?
A: What causes disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis (DPL)? The cause of disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis (DPL) is unknown, but medical researchers believe it is influenced by both hormonal and genetic factors. Not all cases are related to hormone levels, as some cases have occurred in men and in post-menopausal women not receiving hormone replacement therapy. DPL is often associated with uterine leiomyomas but the connection is unclear. Most cases occur sporadically in people with no family history of the condition; however, more than one family member can be affected. Although this suggests that genetic factors may play a role in the development of DPL in some families, researchers have not identified any specific gene changes known to cause the condition.The cause of the condition is considered multifactorial .

---

Q: How to diagnose Disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis ?
A: How is disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis (DPL) diagnosed? An ultrasound may reveal the presence of nodules (lumps) which may indicate disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis (DPL). However, DPL can only be confirmed by a biopsy of the nodule. The nodules should contain smooth muscle cells with no atypia (no abnormal structure) or necrosis (dead cells). The cells usually have both progesterone and estrogen receptors, but this is not always the case. The cells usually have a low mitotic index (meaning they are not dividing at a high rate).

---

Q: What are the treatments for Disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis ?
A: How might disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis (DPL) be treated? Presently there are no treatment guidelines for disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis (DPL). DPL is considered a benign condition and some cases of DPL resolve after the baby is delivered (if pregnant), hormone treatment is stopped (including both birth control pill and hormone replacement therapy), or a hormone producing tumor is removed. However, surgery may be suggested based on the size and location of the tumor.