Topic: Dysequilibrium syndrome

Q: What are the symptoms of Dysequilibrium syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Dysequilibrium syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Dysequilibrium syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cognitive impairment 90% Gait disturbance 90% Hyperreflexia 90% Incoordination 90% Muscular hypotonia 90% Hemiplegia/hemiparesis 50% Seizures 50% Short stature 50% Skeletal muscle atrophy 50% Strabismus 50% Cataract 7.5% Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Broad-based gait - Cerebellar atrophy - Cerebellar hypoplasia - Congenital onset - Cortical gyral simplification - Delayed speech and language development - Dysarthria - Dysdiadochokinesis - Dysmetria - Gait ataxia - Gaze-evoked nystagmus - Hypoplasia of the brainstem - Intellectual disability - Intention tremor - Nonprogressive - Pachygyria - Pes planus - Poor speech - Truncal ataxia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.