Topic: Dyssegmental dysplasia Silverman-Handmaker type

Q: What are the symptoms of Dyssegmental dysplasia Silverman-Handmaker type ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Dyssegmental dysplasia Silverman-Handmaker type? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Dyssegmental dysplasia Silverman-Handmaker type. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 90% Abnormality of pelvic girdle bone morphology 90% Abnormality of the metaphyses 90% Blue sclerae 90% Bowing of the long bones 90% Limitation of joint mobility 90% Micromelia 90% Narrow chest 90% Short stature 90% Atria septal defect 50% Cleft palate 50% Depressed nasal ridge 50% Respiratory insufficiency 50% Umbilical hernia 50% Abnormality of the abdominal wall - Anisospondyly - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cryptorchidism - Disproportionate short-limb short stature - Flat face - Malar flattening - Narrow mouth - Neonatal death - Overgrowth - Posteriorly rotated ears - Pulmonary hypoplasia - Skull defect - Talipes equinovarus - Thoracic hypoplasia - Wide nasal bridge - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.