Topic: Dystonia 8

Q: What is (are) Dystonia 8 ?
A: Paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia is a disorder of the nervous system that causes periods of involuntary movement. Common symptoms include 1 to 4 hour long episodes of irregular, jerking or shaking movements, prolonged contraction of muscles, chorea, and/or writhing movements of the limb. The movements may have no known trigger or be brought on by alcohol, caffeine, stress, fatigue, menses, or excitement.  The familial form is caused by mutations in the PNKD gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Dystonia 8 ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Dystonia 8? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Dystonia 8. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Childhood onset - Dysarthria - Dysphagia - Facial grimacing - Infantile onset - Myokymia - Paroxysmal choreoathetosis - Paroxysmal dystonia - Torticollis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Dystonia 8 ?
A: Are there non-genetic causes of paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia? Yes. Sporadic (non-genetic) causes of paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia have been reported in the literature. Non-genetic causes include lesions of the basal ganglia due to multiple sclerosis, tumors, and vascular lesions. In addition, lesions outside the basal ganglia (including those due to penetrating injury) have been reported as causing symptoms similar to those found in paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia. In these situations, careful evaluation by a neurologist and neuroimaging (such as MRI) may be necessary for diagnosis.