Topic: Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 4

Q: What is (are) Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 4 ?
A: Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 4 (EIEE4) is a form of early infantile epileptic encephalopathy, which refers to a group of neurological conditions characterized by severe seizures beginning in infancy. EIEE4, specifically, is often associated with partial complex or tonic-clonic seizures, although other seizure types have been reported. Other signs and symptoms may include intellectual disability, reduced muscle tone (hypotonia), hypsarrhythmia (an irregular pattern seen on EEG), dyskinesia (involuntary movement of the body), and spastic di- or quadriplegia. EIEE4 is caused by changes (mutations) in the STXBP1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. For example, certain medications are often prescribed to help control seizures, although they are not always effective in all people with the condition.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 4 ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 4? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 4. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Absent speech - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebral atrophy - Cerebral hypomyelination - Developmental regression - EEG with burst suppression - Epileptic encephalopathy - Epileptic spasms - Generalized myoclonic seizures - Generalized tonic seizures - Generalized tonic-clonic seizures - Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum - Hypsarrhythmia - Impaired horizontal smooth pursuit - Infantile encephalopathy - Intellectual disability, severe - Muscular hypotonia - Neonatal onset - Severe global developmental delay - Spastic paraplegia - Spastic tetraplegia - Status epilepticus - Tremor - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.