Topic: Ebstein's anomaly

Q: What is (are) Ebstein's anomaly ?
A: Ebstein's anomaly is a rare heart defect in which parts of the tricuspid valve (which separates the right ventricle from the right atrium) are abnormal. The abnormality causes the tricuspid valve to leak blood backwards into the right atrium. The  backup of blood flow can lead to heart swelling and fluid buildup in the lungs or liver. Sometimes, not enough blood gets out of the heart into the lungs and the person may appear blue. Symptoms range from mild to very severe. Treatment depends on the severity of the defect and may include medications, oxygen therapy, or surgery.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Ebstein's anomaly ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Ebstein's anomaly? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Ebstein's anomaly. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the tricuspid valve 90% Atria septal defect 90% Premature birth 90% Respiratory insufficiency 90% Chest pain 50% Patent ductus arteriosus 50% Abnormality of the endocardium 7.5% Arterial thrombosis 7.5% Cerebral ischemia 7.5% Congestive heart failure 7.5% Sudden cardiac death 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Ebstein's anomaly of the tricuspid valve - Right bundle branch block - Ventricular preexcitation - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.