Topic: Eisenmenger syndrome

Q: What is (are) Eisenmenger syndrome ?
A: Eisenmenger syndrome is a rare progressive heart condition caused by a structural error in the heart, typically a "hole in the heart" (ventricular septal defect) present at birth (congenital heart defect). This causes abnormal blood flow in the heart, resulting in high pressure within the pulmonary artery, the main blood vessel that connects the heart to the lungs (pulmonary hypertension).

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Eisenmenger syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Eisenmenger syndrome? Symptoms of Eisenmenger include shortness of breath, chest pain, feeling tired or dizzy, fainting, abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia), stroke, coughing up blood, swelling of joints from excess uric acid (gout) and, bluish lips, fingers, toes, and skin (cyanosis). Eisenmenger syndrome usually develops before a child reaches puberty but can also develop in young adulthood.

---

Q: What causes Eisenmenger syndrome ?
A: What causes Eisenmenger syndrome? Eisenmenger syndrome is caused by a defect in the heart. Most often, the defect is one called a ventricular septal defect (VSD), a hole between the two pumping chambers (the left and right ventricles) of the heart. Other heart defects that can lead to Eisenmenger syndrome include atrial septal defect (ASD) and patent ductus arteriosus (PDA).  The hole allows blood that has already picked up oxygen from the lungs to flow abnormally back into the lungs, instead of going out to the rest of the body. Over time, this increased blood flow can damage the small blood vessels in the lungs. This causes high blood pressure in the lungs. As a result, the blood backs up and does not go to the lungs to pick up oxygen. Instead, the blood goes from the right side to the left side of the heart, and oxygen-poor blood travels to the rest of the body.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Eisenmenger syndrome ?
A: How might Eisenmenger syndrome be treated? Older children with symptoms of Eisenmenger syndrome may have blood removed from the body (phlebotomy) to reduce the number of red blood cells, and then receive fluids to replace the lost blood (volume replacement). Children may receive oxygen, although it is unclear whether it helps to prevent the disease from getting worse. Children with very severe symptoms may need a heart-lung transplant. Adult patients with Eisenmenger syndrome should be seen by a cardiologist specializing in the care of adults with congenital heart disease.