Topic: Eosinophilic enteropathy

Q: What is (are) Eosinophilic enteropathy ?
A: Eosinophilic enteropathy is a condition that causes a type of white blood cell called an eosinophil to build up in the gastrointestinal system and in the blood. Eosinophils play a role in the bodys immune response by releasing toxins. Eosinophils are associated with allergic-type reactions, but their specific function is largely unknown.When eosinophils build up in the gastrointestinal tract, this begins to affect the body by causing polyps, tissue break down, inflammation, and ulcers. Eosinophilic enteropathy can occur in children or adults and is characterized by intolerance to some foods. Eosinophilic enteropathy can affect any part of the gastrointestinal tract, and is often named by the part affected: colon (colitis), esophagus (esophagitis), stomach (gastritis), or both the stomach and small intestine (gastroenteritis).

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Eosinophilic enteropathy ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of eosinophilic enteropathy? The symptoms of eosinophilic gastroenteritis vary depending on where the eosinophils build up in the gastrointestinal system and which layers of the intestinal wall are involved. Symptoms often include pain, skin rash, acid reflux, anemia, diarrhea, stomach cramps, bleeding, nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, blood loss in stools, and choking. Symptoms can occur at any age, although they usually develop between ages 20 and 50 years. The symptoms of eosinophilic enteropathy overlap with other gastrointestinal disorders, such as ulcerative colitis, which makes diagnosis difficult. It is common for individuals with this disorder to have symptoms for many years before an accurate diagnosis is made.

---

Q: How to diagnose Eosinophilic enteropathy ?
A: How is eosinophilic enteropathy diagnosed? Endoscopy and biopsy is the only way to confirm the diagnosis of eosinophilic enteropathy. During an endoscopy, a gastroenterologist looks at the gastrointestinal tract through an endoscope and takes multiple small samples (biopsies), which a pathologist reviews. A high number of eosinophils suggests the diagnosis of eosinophilic enteropathy. The pathologist will also look at the location of the eosinophils, changes in the tissue layers, and degranulation (spilling of the contents of the eosinophils). Eosinophils may be normally found in small numbers in all areas of the gastrointestinal tract except the esophagus. However, the number of eosinophils seen in individuals with eosinophilic enteropathy is much higher. Once the diagnosis of eosinophilic enteropathy is confirmed, food allergy testing is typically recommended to guide treatment. Tests for food allergies include skin prick testing, patch testing, and a Radioallergosorbent test (RAST).

---

Q: What are the treatments for Eosinophilic enteropathy ?
A: How might eosinophilic enteropathy be treated? There is no "cure" for eosinophilic enteropathy, but treatment can help alleviate symptoms and prevent further damage to the gastrointestinal tract. Treatment of eosinophilic enteropathy varies based on the location of the eosinophils, severity of symptoms, and other medical problems the child or adult may have. In most cases, dietary restrictions and medications can significantly improve the problematic symptoms of this condition. Food allergy testing is used as a guide for restriction or elimination diets. An elimination diet means strictly avoiding all foods to which the patient has tested positive on allergy testing. Skin and patch testing are used to guide elimination diets. Sometimes a stricter diet, called an elemental diet, is needed. Skin and patch testing are used to guide elimination diets, but it only takes one false negative food for the diet to "fail". Elemental diets are diets that do not include whole or broken-down forms of protein. Instead, special elemental formulas are used, which are made of amino acids (the building blocks of proteins), fats, sugars, vitamins and minerals. Amino acids do not cause allergic reactions but whole or partial proteins can. Children and adults who rely in part, or completely, on an elemental amino acid based formula may have a difficult time drinking enough of the formula. To maintain proper nutrition, some require tube feedings directly into the stomach (enteral feeds). In the most severe cases, nutrition is administered directly into the blood stream (parenteral feeds). The American Partnership for Eosinophilic Disorders provides more information about treatment for eosinophilic enteropathy. This organization also provides more details on restricted or elimination diets and elemental diets.