Topic: Esthesioneuroblastoma

Q: What is (are) Esthesioneuroblastoma ?
A: Esthesioneuroblastoma is a rare cancer of the upper part of the nasal cavity called the cribiform plate, which is a bone deep in the skull between the eyes, and above the ethmoid sinuses. It develops in nerve tissue associated with the sense of smell and can occur in people of any age. This cancer is very uncommon, accounting for 7 percent of all cancers of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses. Although it generally grows slowly, an esthesioneuroblastoma can sometimes grow very quickly. Fast-growing tumors can metastasize (spread) even many years after treatment of the initial tumor.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Esthesioneuroblastoma ?
A: What symptoms are associated with esthesioneuroblastoma? Symptoms of esthesioneuroblastoma may include one or more of the following: Nasal obstruction Loss of smell Chronic sinus infections (sinusitis) Nasal bleeding Sinus pain and headache  Visual changes

---

Q: What causes Esthesioneuroblastoma ?
A: What causes esthestioneuroblastoma? The cause of esthesioneuroblastoma is currently unknown.

---

Q: How to diagnose Esthesioneuroblastoma ?
A: How is esthesioneuroblastoma diagnosed? Diagnosis is typically obtained through clinical examination, biopsy, and MRI and CT scans.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Esthesioneuroblastoma ?
A: How is esthesioneuroblastoma usually treated? Various treatment regimens for esthesioneuroblastoma have been used through the years. Early treatment included using either surgery or radiation therapy, but, for the most part, these regimens resulted in high rates of recurrence. Subsequently, multimodality therapy with surgery and radiation therapy has been more frequently administered, and some institutions recommend trimodality therapy, with the addition of chemotherapy to surgery and radiation therapy. Most patients are initially treated with surgical removal if possible. Radiation therapy is most commonly administered after surgical removal of the tumor. The role of chemotherapy for esthesioneuroblastoma remains poorly defined. Many institutions incorporate chemotherapy into the treatment regimen, especially for stage C disease, whereas others have not noted any substantial clinical response to chemotherapy.