Topic: Familial juvenile hyperuricaemic nephropathy

Q: What is (are) Familial juvenile hyperuricaemic nephropathy ?
A: Familial juvenile hyperuricaemic nephropathy (FJHN) is an inherited condition that affects the kidneys. The signs and symptoms vary, even among members of the same family. Many individuals with this condition develop high blood levels of a waste product called uric acid. Normally, the kidneys remove uric acid from the blood and transfer it to urine. In FJHN, the kidneys are unable to remove uric acid from the blood effectively. Beginning in the early teens, FJHN causes gout and slowly progressive kidney disease, resulting in kidney failure. People with FJHN typically require either dialysis to remove wastes from the blood or a kidney transplant. FJHN is caused by mutations in the UMOD gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Familial juvenile hyperuricaemic nephropathy ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Familial juvenile hyperuricaemic nephropathy? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Familial juvenile hyperuricaemic nephropathy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Gout - Juvenile onset - Nephropathy - Progressive - Renal insufficiency - Tubular atrophy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.