Topic: Familial prostate cancer

Q: What is (are) Familial prostate cancer ?
A: Familial prostate cancer is a cluster of prostate cancer within a family. Most cases of prostate cancer occur sporadically in people with no family history of the condition. However, approximately 5% to 10% of prostate cancer cases are believed to be primarily caused by a genetic predisposition to the condition. In many families, the underlying genetic cause is unknown; however, some of these cases are caused by changes (mutations) in the BRCA1, BRCA2, HOXB13, or several other genes. Other cases are likely due to a combination of gene(s) and other shared factors such as environment and lifestyle. High-risk cancer screening at an earlier age is typically recommended in men who have an increased risk for prostate cancer based on personal and/or family histories.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Familial prostate cancer ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Familial prostate cancer? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Familial prostate cancer. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Neoplasm - Prostate cancer - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.