Topic: Familial pemphigus vulgaris

Q: What is (are) Familial pemphigus vulgaris ?
A: Familial pemphigus vulgaris refers to a cluster of pemphigus vulgaris within a family. Pemphigus vulgaris is a rare autoimmune condition that is characterized by blisters and sores on the skin and mucus membranes. Although the exact cause of familial pemphigus vulgaris is unknown, autoimmune conditions generally occur when the body's immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue (in this case, the skin and mucus membranes). Most cases of pemphigus vulgaris occur sporadically in people with no family history of the condition; however, rare reports exist of "familial" cases which affect more than one member of a single family. In these cases, the underlying genetic cause is unknown, although an association between pemphigus vulgaris and certain HLA antigens has been identified. Treatment generally includes medications and other strategies to decrease blister formation, prevent infections and promote healing.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Familial pemphigus vulgaris ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Familial pemphigus vulgaris? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Familial pemphigus vulgaris. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Acantholysis 90% Atypical scarring of skin 90% Feeding difficulties in infancy 90% Recurrent cutaneous abscess formation 90% Urticaria 90% Weight loss 90% Autoimmune antibody positivity - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Oral mucosal blisters - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.