Topic: Familial progressive cardiac conduction defect

Q: What is (are) Familial progressive cardiac conduction defect ?
A: Familial progressive cardiac conduction defect (PCCD) is a is a cardiac (heart) conduction disorder that may progress to complete heart block. Affected people may not have any symptoms, or the condition may cause shortness of breath, dizziness, fainting, abdominal pain, heart failure, or sudden death. Mutations in several genes, including the SCN5A, SCN1B and TRPM4 genes, can cause PCCD. Several other genes may be the cause when PCCD occurs with congenital heart disease. Familial PCCD is usually inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. However, not all people that have the mutated gene will have the condition; in those that do, symptoms and severity can vary (known as reduced penetrance and variable expressivity). Autosomal recessive inheritance and sporadic cases have been reported, but are rare. Treatment includes implantation of a pacemaker.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Familial progressive cardiac conduction defect ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Familial progressive cardiac conduction defect? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Familial progressive cardiac conduction defect. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Arrhythmia 50% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Complete heart block with broad RS complexes - Dyspnea - Heterogeneous - Left anterior fascicular block - Left postterior fascicular block - Right bundle branch block - Sudden cardiac death - Sudden death - Syncope - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.