Topic: Familial esophageal achalasia

Q: What is (are) Familial esophageal achalasia ?
A: Familial esophageal achalasia refers to a cluster of achalasia within a family. Achalasia is a condition that affects the esophagus, the tube that carries food from the mouth to the stomach. In people with achalasia, the normal muscle activity of the esophagus is reduced and the muscular valve where the esophagus and the stomach meet doesn't fully relax. This makes it difficult for food to move from the esophagus to the stomach. As a result, people with achalasia may experience regurgitation of food, chest pain, cough, difficulty swallowing, heartburn, and/or unintentional weight loss. Reports of familial esophageal achalasia are rare and represent less than 1% of all achalasia cases. In these families, the underlying genetic cause of the condition is unknown, but it appears to be inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment aims to allow food to pass more easily into this stomach and may include injections with botulinum toxin (Botox), certain medications and/or surgery.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Familial esophageal achalasia ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Familial esophageal achalasia? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Familial esophageal achalasia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Achalasia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Keratoconjunctivitis sicca - Rheumatoid arthritis - Xerostomia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.