Topic: Fibrolamellar carcinoma

Q: What is (are) Fibrolamellar carcinoma ?
A: Fibrolamellar carcinoma (FLC) is a rare form of liver cancer which is generally diagnosed in adolescents and young adults (before age 40). Many people with early FLC have no signs or symptoms of the condition. When present, symptoms are often nonspecific (i.e. abdominal pain, weight loss, malaise) and blamed on other, more common conditions. The exact underlying cause of FLC is poorly understood. Unlike other forms of liver cancer, FLC typically occurs in the absence of underlying liver inflammation or scarring; thus, specific risk factors for this condition remain unidentified. FLC is typically treated with surgical resection.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Fibrolamellar carcinoma ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Fibrolamellar carcinoma? Many people with early fibrolamellar carcinoma (FLC) have no signs or symptoms of the condition. When present, symptoms are often nonspecific and blamed on other, more common conditions. Some people affected by FLC may experience the following: Abdominal pain Weight loss Malaise Abdominal mass Hepatomegaly    The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Fibrolamellar carcinoma. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Hepatocellular carcinoma - Micronodular cirrhosis - Somatic mutation - Subacute progressive viral hepatitis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Fibrolamellar carcinoma ?
A: What causes fibrolamellar carcinoma? The exact underlying cause of fibrolamellar carcinoma (FLC) is poorly understood. Other forms of liver cancer are often associated with liver cirrhosis (scarring of the liver) which may be caused by alcohol abuse; autoimmune diseases of the liver; Hepatitis B or C viral infections; chronic inflammation of the liver; and/or hemochromatosis. However, FLC typically occurs in the absence of underlying liver inflammation or scarring; thus, specific risk factors for this condition remain unidentified. Recent research suggests that a deletion on chromosome 19 may play a key role in the formation of FLC. This deletion is called a "somatic mutation" since it is only present in the cells of the liver. Somatic mutations accumulate during a person's lifetime and are not inherited or passed on to future generations.

---

Q: How to diagnose Fibrolamellar carcinoma ?
A: How is fibrolamellar carcinoma diagnosed? If fibrolamellar carcinoma (FLC) is suspected based on the presence of certain signs and symptoms, imaging studies such as ultrasound, MRI scan and/or CT scan are typically recommended for diagnosis and staging. Unlike other forms of liver cancer, serum alpha fetoprotein is typically not elevated in FLC. Medscape Reference's Web site offers more specific information on the diagnosis of FLC. Please click on the link to access this resource.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Fibrolamellar carcinoma ?
A: How might fibrolamellar carcinoma be treated? The standard treatment for fibrolamellar carcinoma (FLC) is surgical resection. Due to the rarity of the condition, there is limited information to support the use of other treatment options and there is no standard chemotherapy regimen. However, other treatments may be considered if surgical resection isn't an option. For example, liver transplantation may be considered in patients who are not candidates for partial resection (removing a portion of the liver). Medscape Reference's Web site offers more specific information on the treatment and management of FLC. Please click the link to access this resource.