Topic: Generalized pustular psoriasis

Q: What is (are) Generalized pustular psoriasis ?
A: Generalized pustular psoriasis is a severe inflammatory skin condition that can be life-threatening. Affected people develop episodes of red and tender skin with widespread pustules throughout their body. This is generally accompanied by fever, chills, headache, rapid pulse rate, loss of appetite, nausea and muscle weakness. The condition generally resolves within days or weeks; however, relapses are common. Some cases of generalized pustular psoriasis are caused by changes (mutations) in the IL36RN gene and are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Possible triggers for sporadic forms of the condition include withdrawal from corticosteroids, exposure to certain medications, and/or infection; however, in many cases, the underlying cause is unknown. Generalized pustular psoriasis can be life threatening, so hospitalization and a specialist's care is usually required. Affected areas are treated with topical (on the skin) compresses with emollients and/or steroid creams. Certain medications may also be recommended to manage non-skin-related symptoms.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Generalized pustular psoriasis ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Generalized pustular psoriasis? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Generalized pustular psoriasis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cholangitis 5% Furrowed tongue 5% Nail dysplasia 5% Nail dystrophy 5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Erythema - Fever - Parakeratosis - Psoriasis - Pustule - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.