Topic: Geographic tongue

Q: What is (are) Geographic tongue ?
A: Geographic tongue is a condition that causes chronic and recurrent lesions on the tongue that resemble psoriasis of the skin. It is characterized by pink to red, slightly depressed lesions with irregular, elevated, white or yellow borders. The lesions may also occur in the mucosa of the mouth and labia; this condition is called "areata migrans" because they  typically disappear from one area and move to another. The tongue is normally covered with tiny, pinkish-white bumps (papillae), which are actually short, fine, hair-like projections. With geographic tongue, patches on the surface of the tongue are missing papillae and appear as smooth, red "islands," often with slightly raised borders. These patches (lesions) give the tongue a map-like, or geographic, appearance. In most cases there are no symptoms but sometimes it is painful when inflamed. The cause is still unknown. Many researchers think it is linked with psoriasis but more research is needed to better understand the connection. Also, hereditary and environmental factors may be involved. The condition is benign and localized, generally requiring no treatment except reassurance. If painful it may be treated with steroid gels or antihistamine mouth rinses.[12267]

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Geographic tongue ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Geographic tongue? The lesions seen in geographic tongue resemble those of psoriasis. Most patients do not experience symptoms. It has been estimated that about 5% of individuals who have geographic tongue complain of sensitivity to hot or spicy foods when the their lesions are active. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Geographic tongue. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Furrowed tongue - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Geographic tongue ?
A: What causes geographic tongue? Is it genetic? The exact cause of geographic tongue has not been identified. However, because the condition may be present in several members of the same family, genetics may increase a person's chances of developing the condition. A study by Guimares (2007) showed that a specific variant of a gene called IL-1B (interleukin-1 beta) is associated with an increased risk of developing geographic tongue and suggests a genetic basis for the development of the disease. Further research may result in a better understanding of the genetic influences involved in the development of geographic tongue.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Geographic tongue ?
A: What treatment is available for geographic tongue? Because geographic tongue is a benign (harmless) condition and does not typically cause symptoms, treatment is usually unnecessary. Even those patients who experience sensitivity to hot or spicy foods, generally do not require treatment. With severe symptoms, topical corticosteroids, zinc supplements, and topical anesthetic rinses seem to reduce the discomfort in some patients.