Topic: Glutaric acidemia type III

Q: What is (are) Glutaric acidemia type III ?
A: Glutaric acidemia type III is a rare metabolic condition characterized by persistent, isolated accumulation or excretion of glutaric acid. No specific phenotype has been described, as symptoms vary and some individuals remain symptom-free. Unlike other types of glutaric acidemia, this type is caused by a peroxisomal rather than a mitochondrial dysfunction. Mutations in the C7ORF10 gene on chromosome 7p14 have been identified in some people with glutaric acidemia type III and the condition follows an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Treatment with riboflavin has been helpful in some patients.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Glutaric acidemia type III ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Glutaric acidemia type III? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Glutaric acidemia type III. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Goiter 5% Hyperthyroidism 5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Diarrhea - Failure to thrive - Glutaric aciduria - Hypertension - Vomiting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.