Topic: Granuloma annulare

Q: What is (are) Granuloma annulare ?
A: Granuloma annulare is a long-term (chronic) skin disease consisting of a rash with reddish bumps arranged in a circle or ring. The most commonly affected areas are the forearms, hands and feet. The lesions associated with granuloma annulare usually resolve without treatment. Strong steroids (applied as a cream or injection) are sometimes used to clear the rash more quickly. Most symptoms will disappear within 2 years (even without treatment), but recurrence is common. The underlying cause of granuloma annulare is unknown.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Granuloma annulare ?
A: What symptoms are associated with granuloma annulare? People with this condition usually notice a ring of small, firm bumps (papules) over the backs of the forearms, hands or feet. Occasionally, multiple rings may be found. Rarely, granuloma annulare may appear as a firm nodule under the skin of the arms or legs.

---

Q: What causes Granuloma annulare ?
A: What causes granuloma annulare? The cause of granuloma annulare is unknown, although there is much evidence that it is linked to the immune system. It has been reported to follow insect bites; sun exposure; tuberculin skin tests, ingestion of allopurinol; trauma; and viral infections, including Epstein-Barr, HIV, hepatitis C, and herpes zoster. Occasionally, granuloma annulare may be associated with diabetes or thyroid disease.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Granuloma annulare ?
A: How might granuloma annulare be treated? Granuloma annulare is difficult to treat and there are a limited number of clinical trials to reliably inform patients and physicians of the treatment options. Fortunately, most lesions of granuloma annulare disappear with no treatment within two years. Sometimes, however, the rings can remain for many years. Very strong topical steroid creams or ointments may be used to speed the disappearance of the lesions. Injections of steroids directly into the rings may also be effective. Some physicians may choose to freeze the lesions with liquid nitrogen. In severe cases, ultraviolet light therapy (PUVA) or oral medications may be needed. Other treatments that have been tried include :   Dapsone (a type of antibiotic) for widespread granuloma annulare  Isotretinoin  Etretinate (not available in the US)  Hydroxychloroquine  Chloroquine  Cyclosporine  Niacinamide  Oral psoralen  Vitamin E combined with a 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor  Fumaric acid esters  Topical tacrolimus  Pimecrolimus  Infliximab (in a patient with disseminated granuloma annulare that did not respond to other treatments) A review article titled, 'Diagnosis and Management of Granuloma Annulare' provides additional information on treatment options for granuloma annulare: http://www.aafp.org/afp/20061115/1729.html  Also, an article from Medscape Reference provides information on treatment for granuloma annulare at the following link. You may need to register to view the article, but registration is free. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1123031-overview