Topic: Growth hormone insensitivity with immunodeficiency

Q: What are the symptoms of Growth hormone insensitivity with immunodeficiency ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Growth hormone insensitivity with immunodeficiency? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Growth hormone insensitivity with immunodeficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal facial shape 90% Abnormality of lipid metabolism 90% Insulin resistance 90% Microcephaly 90% Short stature 90% Delayed eruption of teeth 50% Delayed skeletal maturation 50% Fine hair 50% Hypoglycemia 50% Hypoplasia of penis 50% Type II diabetes mellitus 50% Abnormality of immune system physiology 7.5% Abnormality of the fontanelles or cranial sutures 7.5% Abnormality of the nail 7.5% Abnormality of the voice 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Diabetes insipidus 7.5% Hearing impairment 7.5% Truncal obesity 7.5% Growth hormone deficiency - Respiratory difficulties - Severe short stature - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.