Topic: Heart Failure

Q: What is (are) Heart Failure ?
A: In heart failure, the heart cannot pump enough blood to meet the body's needs. In some cases, the heart cannot fill with enough blood. In other cases, the heart can't pump blood to the rest of the body with enough force. Some people have both problems. Heart failure develops over time as the pumping action of the heart gets weaker. It can affect either the right, the left, or both sides of the heart. Heart failure does not mean that the heart has stopped working or is about to stop working. When heart failure affects the left side of the heart, the heart cannot pump enough oxygen-rich blood to the rest of the body. When heart failure affects the right side, the heart cannot pump enough blood to the lungs, where it picks up oxygen. The Heart's Pumping Action In normal hearts, blood vessels called veins bring oxygen-poor blood from the body to the right side of the heart. It is then pumped through the pulmonary artery to the lungs, picking up oxygen. From there, the blood returns to the left side of the heart. Then it is pumped through a large artery called the aorta that distributes blood throughout the body. When the heart is weakened by heart failure, blood and fluid can back up into the lungs, and fluid builds up in the feet, ankles, and legs. People with heart failure often experience tiredness and shortness of breath. Heart Failure is Serious Heart failure is a serious and common condition. Scientists estimate that 5 million people in the U.S. have heart failure and that number is growing. It contributes to 300,000 deaths each year. Heart failure is most common in those age 65 and older and it is the number one reason older people are hospitalized. Other Names for Heart Failure Heart failure can also be called congestive heart failure, systolic heart failure, diastolic heart failure, left-sided heart failure, or right-sided heart failure.

---

Q: What causes Heart Failure ?
A: Heart failure is caused by other diseases or conditions that damage the heart muscle such as coronary artery disease (including heart attacks), diabetes, and high blood pressure. Treating these problems can prevent or improve heart failure. Coronary Artery Disease Coronary artery disease is a leading cause of death in men and women. It happens when the arteries that supply blood to the heart become hardened and narrowed. High Blood Pressure High blood pressure is the force of blood pushing against the walls of the arteries. If this pressure rises and stays high over time, it can weaken your heart and lead to plaque buildup, which can then lead to heart failure. Diabetes Diabetes is characterized by having too much glucose, or sugar, in the blood for a long time. This can cause heart problems because high blood glucose can damage parts of the body such as the heart and blood vessels. This damage weakens the heart, often leading to heart failure. Other Diseases Other diseases and conditions also can lead to heart failure, such as - Cardiomyopathy (KAR-de-o-mi-OP-ah-thee), or heart muscle disease. Cardiomyopathy may be present at birth or caused by injury or infection.   - Heart valve disease. Problems with the heart valves may be present at birth or caused by infection, heart attack, or damage from heart disease.   - Arrhythmias (ah-RITH-me-ahs), or irregular heartbeats. These heart problems may be present at birth or caused by heart disease or heart defects.   - Congenital (kon-JEN-ih-tal) heart defects. These problems with the heart's structure are present at birth.  Cardiomyopathy (KAR-de-o-mi-OP-ah-thee), or heart muscle disease. Cardiomyopathy may be present at birth or caused by injury or infection. Heart valve disease. Problems with the heart valves may be present at birth or caused by infection, heart attack, or damage from heart disease. Arrhythmias (ah-RITH-me-ahs), or irregular heartbeats. These heart problems may be present at birth or caused by heart disease or heart defects. Congenital (kon-JEN-ih-tal) heart defects. These problems with the heart's structure are present at birth. Other Factors Other factors also can injure the heart muscle and lead to heart failure. Examples include - treatments for cancer, such as radiation and chemotherapy   - thyroid disorders (having either too much or too little thyroid hormone in the body)  - alcohol abuse or cocaine and other illegal drug use   - HIV/AIDS   - too much vitamin E.  treatments for cancer, such as radiation and chemotherapy thyroid disorders (having either too much or too little thyroid hormone in the body) alcohol abuse or cocaine and other illegal drug use HIV/AIDS too much vitamin E. Sleep Apnea Heart damage from obstructive sleep apnea may worsen heart failure. Sleep apnea is a common disorder in which you have one or more pauses in breathing or shallow breaths while you sleep. Sleep apnea can deprive your heart of oxygen and increase its workload. Treating this sleep disorder might improve heart failure. Who Is at Risk? Heart failure can happen to almost anyone. It is the number one reason for hospitalization for people over age 65. Heart failure is more common in - people who are 65 years old or older   - African-Americans  - people who are overweight  - people who have had a heart attack  - men.  people who are 65 years old or older African-Americans people who are overweight people who have had a heart attack men. Aging can weaken the heart muscle. Older people also may have had diseases for many years that led to heart failure. African Americans are more likely to have heart failure than people of other races. They're also more likely to have symptoms at a younger age, have more hospital visits due to heart failure, and die from heart failure.  Excess weight puts strain on the heart. Being overweight also increases your risk of heart disease and type 2 diabetes. These diseases can lead to heart failure. A history of a heart attack puts people at greater risk for heart failure. Men have a higher rate of heart failure than women.

---

Q: Who is at risk for Heart Failure? ?
A: Preventing Heart Failure There are a number of things you can do to reduce the risk for coronary artery disease and heart failure. These things include - keeping your cholesterol levels healthy  - keeping your blood pressure at a normal level  - managing diabetes   - maintaining a healthy weight   - quitting smoking  - limiting the amount of alcohol you drink  - following a heart healthy diet  - limiting the amount of sodium (salt) you consume  - getting regular exercise   - avoiding using illegal drugs. keeping your cholesterol levels healthy keeping your blood pressure at a normal level managing diabetes maintaining a healthy weight quitting smoking limiting the amount of alcohol you drink following a heart healthy diet limiting the amount of sodium (salt) you consume getting regular exercise avoiding using illegal drugs. Keep Your Cholesterol Levels Healthy Keeping your cholesterol levels healthy can help prevent coronary artery disease. Your goal for LDL, or "bad," cholesterol, depends on how many other risk factors you have. Risk factors include - being a cigarette smoker  -  having high blood pressure   -  having low HDL cholesterol  -  being 45 or older if you are a man and 55 or older if you are a woman  -  having a close relative who had coronary artery disease at an earlier-than-usual age (before age 55 for male relatives and before age 65 for female relatives).  being a cigarette smoker having high blood pressure having low HDL cholesterol being 45 or older if you are a man and 55 or older if you are a woman having a close relative who had coronary artery disease at an earlier-than-usual age (before age 55 for male relatives and before age 65 for female relatives). Recommended LDL Cholesterol Goals -  If you don't have coronary heart disease or diabetes and have one or no risk factors, your LDL goal is less than 160 mg/dL.  - If you don't have coronary heart disease or diabetes and have two or more risk factors, your LDL goal is less than 130 mg/dL.  - If you do have coronary heart disease or diabetes, your LDL goal is less than 100 mg/dL.   - The goal for HDL, or "good," cholesterol is above 40 in men and above 50 in women.  - The goal for triglycerides, another fat in the blood, is below 150.  If you don't have coronary heart disease or diabetes and have one or no risk factors, your LDL goal is less than 160 mg/dL. If you don't have coronary heart disease or diabetes and have two or more risk factors, your LDL goal is less than 130 mg/dL. If you do have coronary heart disease or diabetes, your LDL goal is less than 100 mg/dL. The goal for HDL, or "good," cholesterol is above 40 in men and above 50 in women. The goal for triglycerides, another fat in the blood, is below 150. Learn how to control your cholesterol with TLC -- Therapeutic Lifestyle Changes.  Keep Blood Pressure at a Normal Level High blood pressure causes the heart to get larger and work harder, which can then lead to heart failure. You should aim for a blood pressure level of 130/80 or below. Talk to your doctor about ways to lower your blood pressure.  Get tips on how to control your blood pressure.  Manage Diabetes If you have diabetes, its important to manage it properly. Diabetes is characterized by having too much glucose, or sugar, in the blood for a long time. This can cause heart problems because high blood glucose can damage parts of the body such as the heart and blood vessels. This damage weakens the heart, often leading to heart failure. See ways to manage your diabetes every day.  Maintain a Healthy Weight Excess weight puts strain on the heart. Being overweight also increases your risk of heart disease and type 2 diabetes. These diseases can lead to heart failure.  See a sensible approach to weight loss.  Don't Smoke If you smoke, quit. For free help quitting, call a smoking quit line.  See medications to help you quit.  Follow a Heart Healthy Diet Heart-healthy foods include those high in fiber, such as oat bran, oatmeal, whole-grain breads and cereals, fruits, and vegetables. You can also maintain a heart-healthy diet by limiting foods that are high in saturated fat, trans-fat, and cholesterol, such as meats, butter, dairy products with fat, eggs, shortening, lard, and foods with palm oil or coconut oil. For more on healthy eating, see Eating Well As You Get Older. Limit the Amount of Alcohol You Drink In general, healthy men and women over age 65 should not drink more than three drinks a day or a total of seven drinks a week. Learn how alcohol affects you as get older.  Limit the Amount of Sodium Sodium contributes to high blood pressure and fluid retention. Older adults should limit their intake of sodium to1,500 milligrams daily (about 2/3 tsp. of salt).  See ways to cut back on your salt intake.  Get Regular Exericse Studies show that people with heart disease, diabetes, and high blood pressure benefit from regular exercise. In fact, inactive people are nearly twice as likely to develop heart disease as those who are more active. Aim for at least 30 minutes a day of exercise. Check with your doctor before starting any exercise program. For information on exercise and older adults, see  Benefits of Exercise or visit Go4Life, the exercise and physical activity campaign for older adults from the National Institute on Aging.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Heart Failure ?
A: Common Symptoms The most common symptoms of heart failure include shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, feeling tired, and swelling. Swelling usually occurs in the ankles, feet, legs, and sometimes in the abdomen. Swelling is caused by fluid buildup in the body. The fluid buildup can lead to weight gain as well as a cough. The cough can be worse at night and when lying down. When symptoms first begin, you might feel tired or short of breath after routine physical activities, such as climbing stairs. As heart failure progresses, the symptoms get worse. You may feel tired or short of breath after performing simple activities, like getting dressed.

---

Q: How to diagnose Heart Failure ?
A: Diagnosing Heart Failure There is not one specific test to diagnose heart failure. Because the symptoms are common for other conditions, your doctor will determine if you have heart failure by doing a detailed medical history, an examination, and several tests. The tests will identify whether you have any diseases or conditions that can cause heart failure. They will also rule out any other causes of your symptoms and determine the amount of damage to your heart. During a physical examination, you can expect your doctor to listen to your heart for abnormal sounds and listen to your lungs for a buildup of fluid. Your doctor will also look for swelling in your ankles, feet, legs, abdomen, and in the veins in your neck If your doctor determines that you have signs of heart failure, he or she may order several tests. Diagnostic Tests Tests that are given to determine heart failure include an electrocardiogram (EKG or ECG), a chest x-ray, and a BNP blood test. An EKG or ECG  -- electrocardiogram -- measures the rate and regularity of your heartbeat. This test can also show if you have had a heart attack and whether the walls of your heart have thickened. A chest X-ray takes a picture of your heart and lungs. It will show whether your heart is enlarged or your lungs have fluid in them, both signs of heart failure. A BNP blood test measures the level of a hormone in your blood called BNP -- brain natriuretic peptide -- that increases in heart failure. Once these initial tests have been performed, your doctor may decide to send you to a cardiologist, a specialist in the diagnosis and treatment of heart disease. A cardiologist will perform a physical exam and may order other tests. Other Tests Tests that can identify the cause of heart failure include an echocardiogram, a Holter monitor, and an exercise stress test. An echocardiogram is one of the most useful tests for diagnosing heart failure. This test uses sound waves to create a picture of the heart and shows how well the heart is filling with blood. Your doctor uses this test to determine whether any areas of your heart are damaged. A Holter monitor, which is a small box that is attached to patches placed on your chest. The monitor, which is worn for 24 hours, provides a continuous recording of heart rhythm during normal activity. An exercise stress test captures your EKG and blood pressure before, during, or after exercise to see how your heart responds to exercise. This test tells doctors how your heart responds to activity.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Heart Failure ?
A: There is no cure for heart failure, but it can be controlled by treating the underlying conditions that cause it. Treatment for heart failure will depend on the type and stage of heart failure (the severity of the condition). The goals for treatment of all stages of heart failure are to reduce symptoms, treat the cause (such as heart disease, high blood pressure, or diabetes), stop the disease from worsening, and prolong life. Treatments for Heart Failure Treatments for heart failure include - lifestyle changes  - medications  - specialized care for those who are in the advanced stages. lifestyle changes medications specialized care for those who are in the advanced stages. Treatment for heart failure will reduce the chances that you will have to go to the hospital and make it easier for you to do the things you like to do. It is very important that you follow your treatment plan by keeping doctor appointments, taking medications, and making lifestyle changes.

---

Q: What is (are) Heart Failure ?
A: In heart failure, the heart cannot pump enough blood through the body. Heart failure develops over time as the pumping action of the heart gets weaker. Heart failure does not mean that the heart has stopped working or is about to stop working. When the heart is weakened by heart failure, blood and fluid can back up into the lungs and fluid builds up in the feet, ankles, and legs. People with heart failure often experience tiredness and shortness of breath.

---

Q: What causes Heart Failure ?
A: Heart failure is caused by other diseases and conditions that damage the heart muscle. It is most commonly caused by coronary artery disease, including heart attack. Diabetes and high blood pressure also contribute to heart failure risk. People who have had a heart attack are at high risk of developing heart failure.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Heart Failure ?
A: The most common symptoms of heart failure include shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, feeling tired, and swelling. Swelling is caused by fluid build-up in the body. Fluid buildup can lead to weight gain and frequent urination, as well as coughing.

---

Q: How many people are affected by Heart Failure ?
A: Approximately 5 million people in the United States have heart failure. It contributes to 300,000 deaths each year. It is the number one cause of hospitalizations for people over the age of 65.

---

Q: Who is at risk for Heart Failure? ?
A: Heart failure is more common in - people who are 65 years old or older   - African-Americans  - people who are overweight   - people who have had a heart attack  - men. people who are 65 years old or older African-Americans people who are overweight people who have had a heart attack men. Aging can weaken the heart muscle. Older people also may have had diseases for many years that led to heart failure. African Americans are more likely to have heart failure than people of other races. They're also more likely to have symptoms at a younger age, have more hospital visits due to heart failure, and die from heart failure. Excess weight puts strain on the heart. Being overweight also increases your risk of heart disease and type 2 diabetes. These diseases can lead to heart failure. A history of a heart attack puts people at greater risk for heart failure. Men have a higher rate of heart failure than women.

---

Q: How to prevent Heart Failure ?
A: Ways to prevent heart failure include - keeping your cholesterol and blood pressure levels healthy  - keeping diabetes in check   - maintaining a healthy weight   - quitting smoking   - following a heart healthy diet  - limiting the amount of alcohol you drink   - eating a diet low in salt because salt can cause extra fluid to build up in your body and also contribute to high blood pressure. Older adults should limit their sodium (salt) intake to1500 mg a day (about 2/3 tsp of salt).   - getting regular exercise. Aim for at least 30 minutes a day of exercise. Check with your doctor before starting any exercise program. For information about exercises that older adults can do safely, see Exercises to Try or visit Go4Life, the exercise and physical activity campaign for older adults from the National Institute on Aging.  keeping your cholesterol and blood pressure levels healthy keeping diabetes in check maintaining a healthy weight quitting smoking following a heart healthy diet limiting the amount of alcohol you drink eating a diet low in salt because salt can cause extra fluid to build up in your body and also contribute to high blood pressure. Older adults should limit their sodium (salt) intake to1500 mg a day (about 2/3 tsp of salt). getting regular exercise. Aim for at least 30 minutes a day of exercise. Check with your doctor before starting any exercise program. For information about exercises that older adults can do safely, see Exercises to Try or visit Go4Life, the exercise and physical activity campaign for older adults from the National Institute on Aging.

---

Q: What is (are) Heart Failure ?
A: Keeping your cholesterol levels healthy can help prevent coronary artery disease. Your goal for LDL, or "bad," cholesterol depends on how many other risk factors you have. Here are recommended LDL cholesterol goals. - If you don't have coronary heart disease or diabetes and have one or no risk factors, your LDL goal is less than 160 mg/dL.   - If you don't have coronary heart disease or diabetes and have two or more risk factors, your LDL goal is less than 130 mg/dL.  - If you do have coronary heart disease or diabetes, your LDL goal is less than 100 mg/dL. If you don't have coronary heart disease or diabetes and have one or no risk factors, your LDL goal is less than 160 mg/dL. If you don't have coronary heart disease or diabetes and have two or more risk factors, your LDL goal is less than 130 mg/dL. If you do have coronary heart disease or diabetes, your LDL goal is less than 100 mg/dL. The goal for HDL, or "good," cholesterol is above 40 in men and above 50 in women. The goal for triglycerides, another fat in the blood, is below 150.

---

Q: How to diagnose Heart Failure ?
A: There is not one specific test to diagnose heart failure. Because the symptoms are common for other conditions, your doctor will determine if you have heart failure by doing a detailed medical history, an examination, and several tests. During a physical exam, a doctor will listen for abnormal heart sounds and lung sounds that indicate fluid buildup, as well as look for signs of swelling. If there are signs of heart failure, the doctor may order several tests, including: - an EKG, or electrocardiogram, to measure the rate and regularity of the heartbeat  - a chest X-ray to evaluate the heart and lungs  - a BNP blood test to measure the level of a hormone called BNP that increases when heart failure is present. an EKG, or electrocardiogram, to measure the rate and regularity of the heartbeat a chest X-ray to evaluate the heart and lungs a BNP blood test to measure the level of a hormone called BNP that increases when heart failure is present.

---

Q: How to diagnose Heart Failure ?
A: Once initial tests have been performed, your doctor may decide to send you to a cardiologist, a specialist in diagnosis and treatment of heart disease. A cardiologist will perform a physical exam and may order other tests. There are several tests that can identify the cause of heart failure. These tests include: - An echocardiogram is one of the most useful tests for diagnosing heart failure. This test uses sound waves to create a picture of the heart and shows how well the heart is filling with blood. Your doctor uses this test to determine whether any areas of your heart are damaged.  An echocardiogram is one of the most useful tests for diagnosing heart failure. This test uses sound waves to create a picture of the heart and shows how well the heart is filling with blood. Your doctor uses this test to determine whether any areas of your heart are damaged. - A Holter monitor, which is a small box that is attached to patches placed on your chest. The monitor, which is worn for 24 hours, provides a continuous recording of heart rhythm during normal activity. A Holter monitor, which is a small box that is attached to patches placed on your chest. The monitor, which is worn for 24 hours, provides a continuous recording of heart rhythm during normal activity. - An exercise stress test captures your EKG and blood pressure before, during, or after exercise to see how your heart responds to exercise. This test tells doctors how your heart responds to activity.  An exercise stress test captures your EKG and blood pressure before, during, or after exercise to see how your heart responds to exercise. This test tells doctors how your heart responds to activity.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Heart Failure ?
A: Treatment for heart failure includes lifestyle changes medications specialized care for those in advanced stages of the disease.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Heart Failure ?
A: Lifestyle changes to treat heart failure may include - reducing salt and fluid intake  - following a heart healthy diet  - adopting a plan to lose weight  - quitting smoking   - engaging in physical activity. reducing salt and fluid intake following a heart healthy diet adopting a plan to lose weight quitting smoking engaging in physical activity.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Heart Failure ?
A: Many medications are used to manage heart failure. They include diuretics, ACE inhibitors, beta blockers and digoxin. Diuretics are used to reduce fluid buildup. ACE inhibitors work to improve heart failure in many ways, including lowering blood pressure. Beta blockers can also improve heart failure in many ways, including slowing the heart rate. Digoxin affects the hormones that worsen heart failure.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Heart Failure ?
A: For severe heart failure, patients may require additional oxygen, a mechanical heart pump, or a heart transplant.

---

Q: What is (are) Heart Failure ?
A: More detailed information on heart failure is available at http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/dci

---

Q: What is (are) Heart Failure ?
A: Heart failure is a condition in which the heart can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs. Heart failure does not mean that your heart has stopped or is about to stop working. It means that your heart is not able to pump blood the way it should. It can affect one or both sides of the heart.    The weakening of the heart's pumping ability causes       - Blood and fluid to back up into the lungs    - The buildup of fluid in the feet, ankles and legs - called edema    - Tiredness and shortness of breath       Common causes of heart failure are coronary artery disease, high blood pressure and diabetes. It is more common in people who are 65 years old or older, African Americans, people who are overweight, and people who have had a heart attack. Men have a higher rate of heart failure than women.    Your doctor will diagnose heart failure by doing a physical exam and heart tests. Treatment includes treating the underlying cause of your heart failure, medicines, and heart transplantation if other treatments fail.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

---

Q: What is (are) Heart Failure ?
A: Heart failure is a condition in which the heart can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs. In some cases, the heart can't fill with enough blood. In other cases, the heart can't pump blood to the rest of the body with enough force. Some people have both problems.
                
The term "heart failure" doesn't mean that your heart has stopped or is about to stop working. However, heart failure is a serious condition that requires medical care.
                
Overview
                
Heart failure develops over time as the heart's pumping action grows weaker. The condition can affect the right side of the heart only, or it can affect both sides of the heart. Most cases involve both sides of the heart.
                
Right-side heart failure occurs if the heart can't pump enough blood to the lungs to pick up oxygen. Left-side heart failure occurs if the heart can't pump enough oxygen-rich blood to the rest of the body.
                
Right-side heart failure may cause fluid to build up in the feet, ankles, legs, liver, abdomen, and the veins in the neck. Right-side and left-side heart failure also may cause shortness of breath and fatigue (tiredness).
                
The leading causes of heart failure are diseases that damage the heart. Examples include coronary heart disease (CHD), high blood pressure, and diabetes.
                
Outlook
                
Heart failure is a very common condition. About 5.7 million people in the United States have heart failure.Both children and adults can have the condition, although the symptoms and treatments differ. The Health Topicfocuses on heart failure in adults.
                
Currently, heart failure has no cure. However, treatmentssuch as medicines and lifestyle changescan help people who have the condition live longer and more active lives. Researchers continue to study new ways to treat heart failure and its complications.

---

Q: What causes Heart Failure ?
A: Conditions that damage or overwork the heart muscle can cause heart failure. Over time, the heart weakens. It isnt able to fill with and/or pump blood as well as it should. As the heart weakens, certain proteins and substances might be released into the blood. These substances have a toxic effect on the heart and blood flow, and they worsen heart failure.
                
Causes of heart failure include:
                
Coronary heart disease
                
Diabetes
                
High blood pressure
                
Other heart conditions or diseases
                
Other factors
                

                
Coronary Heart Disease
                
Coronary heart disease is a condition in which a waxy substance called plaque builds up inside the coronary arteries. These arteries supply oxygen-rich blood to your heart muscle.
                
Plaque narrows the arteries and reduces blood flow to your heart muscle. The buildup of plaque also makes it more likely that blood clots will form in your arteries. Blood clots can partially or completely block blood flow. Coronary heart disease can lead to chest pain or discomfort calledangina, aheart attack, and heart damage.
                

                
Diabetes
                
Diabetes is a disease in which the bodys blood glucose (sugar) level is too high. The body normally breaks down food into glucose and then carries it to cells throughout the body. The cells use a hormone called insulin to turn the glucose into energy.
                
In diabetes, the body doesnt make enough insulin or doesnt use its insulin properly. Over time, high blood sugar levels can damage and weaken the heart muscle and the blood vessels around the heart, leading to heart failure.
                

                
High Blood Pressure
                
Blood pressure is the force of blood pushing against the walls of the arteries. If this pressure rises and stays high over time, it can weaken your heart and lead to plaque buildup.
                
Blood pressure is considered high if it stays at or above 140/90 mmHg over time. (The mmHg is millimeters of mercurythe units used to measure blood pressure.) If you have diabetes or chronic kidney disease, high blood pressure is defined as 130/80 mmHg or higher.
                

                
Other Heart Conditions or Diseases
                
Other conditions and diseases also can lead to heart failure, such as:
                
Arrhythmia. Happens when a problem occurs with the rate or rhythm of the heartbeat.
                
Cardiomyopathy.Happens when the heart muscle becomes enlarged, thick, or rigid.
                
Congenital heart defects. Problems with the hearts structure are present at birth.
                
Heart valve disease. Occurs if one or more of your heart valves doesnt work properly, which can be present at birth or caused by infection, other heart conditions, and age.
                

                
Other Factors
                
Other factors also can injure the heart muscle and lead to heart failure. Examples include:
                
Alcohol abuse or cocaine and other illegal drug use
                
HIV/AIDS
                
Thyroid disorders (having either too much or too little thyroid hormone in the body)
                
Too much vitamin E
                
Treatments for cancer, such as radiation and chemotherapy

---

Q: Who is at risk for Heart Failure? ?
A: About 5.7 million people in the United States have heart failure. The number of people who have this condition is growing.
                
Heart failure is more common in:
                
People who are age 65 or older. Aging can weaken the heart muscle. Older people also may have had diseases for many years that led to heart failure. Heart failure is a leading cause of hospital stays among people on Medicare.
                
Blacks are more likely to have heart failure than people of other races. Theyre also more likely to have symptoms at a younger age, have more hospital visits due to heart failure, and die from heart failure.
                
People who areoverweight. Excess weight puts strain on the heart. Being overweight also increases your risk of heart disease and type 2diabetes. These diseases can lead to heart failure.
                
People who have had a heart attack. Damage to the heart muscle from a heart attack and can weaken the heart muscle.
                
Children who havecongenital heart defectsalso can develop heart failure. These defects occur if the heart, heart valves, or blood vessels near the heart dont form correctly while a baby is in the womb. Congenital heart defects can make the heart work harder. This weakens the heart muscle, which can lead to heart failure. Children dont have the same symptoms of heart failure or get the same treatments as adults. This Health Topic focuses on heart failure in adults.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Heart Failure ?
A: The most common signs and symptoms of heart failure are:
                
Shortness of breath or trouble breathing
                
Fatigue (tiredness)
                
Swelling in the ankles, feet, legs, abdomen, and veins in the neck
                
All of these symptoms are the result of fluid buildup in your body. When symptoms start, you may feel tired and short of breath after routine physical effort, like climbing stairs.
                
As your heart grows weaker, symptoms get worse. You may begin to feel tired and short of breath after getting dressed or walking across the room. Some people have shortness of breath while lying flat.
                
Fluid buildup from heart failure also causes weight gain, frequent urination, and a cough that's worse at night and when you're lying down. This cough may be a sign of acute pulmonary edema (e-DE-ma). This is a condition in which too much fluid builds up in your lungs. The condition requires emergency treatment.
                
Heart Failure Signs and Symptoms

---

Q: How to diagnose Heart Failure ?
A: Your doctor will diagnose heart failure based on your medical and family histories, a physical exam, and test results. The signs and symptoms of heart failure also are common in other conditions. Thus, your doctor will:
                
Find out whether you have a disease or condition that can cause heart failure, such as coronary heart disease (CHD), high blood pressure, or diabetes
                
Rule out other causes of your symptoms
                
Find any damage to your heart and check how well your heart pumps blood
                
Early diagnosis and treatment can help people who have heart failure live longer, more active lives.
                
Medical and Family Histories
                
Your doctor will ask whether you or others in your family have or have had a disease or condition that can cause heart failure.
                
Your doctor also will ask about your symptoms. He or she will want to know which symptoms you have, when they occur, how long you've had them, and how severe they are. Your answers will help show whether and how much your symptoms limit your daily routine.
                
Physical Exam
                
During the physical exam, your doctor will:
                
Listen to your heart for sounds that aren't normal
                
Listen to your lungs for the sounds of extra fluid buildup
                
Look for swelling in your ankles, feet, legs, abdomen, and the veins in your neck
                
Diagnostic Tests
                
No single test can diagnose heart failure. If you have signs and symptoms of heart failure, your doctor may recommend one or more tests.
                
Your doctor also may refer you to a cardiologist. A cardiologist is a doctor who specializes in diagnosing and treating heart diseases and conditions.
                
EKG (Electrocardiogram)
                
An EKG is a simple, painless test that detects and records the heart's electrical activity. The test shows how fast your heart is beating and its rhythm (steady or irregular). An EKG also records the strength and timing of electrical signals as they pass through your heart.
                
An EKG may show whether the walls in your heart's pumping chambers are thicker than normal. Thicker walls can make it harder for your heart to pump blood. An EKG also can show signs of a previous or current heart attack.
                
Chest X Ray
                
A chest x raytakes pictures of the structures inside your chest, such as your heart, lungs, and blood vessels. This test can show whether your heart is enlarged, you have fluid in your lungs, or you have lung disease.
                
BNP Blood Test
                
This test checks the level of a hormone in your blood called BNP. The level of this hormone rises during heart failure.
                
Echocardiography
                
Echocardiography (echo) uses sound waves to create a moving picture of your heart. The test shows the size and shape of your heart and how well your heart chambers and valves work.
                
Echo also can identify areas of poor blood flow to the heart, areas of heart muscle that aren't contracting normally, and heart muscle damage caused by lack of blood flow.
                
Echo might be done before and after a stress test (see below). A stress echo can show how well blood is flowing through your heart. The test also can show how well your heart pumps blood when it beats.
                
Doppler Ultrasound
                
A Doppler ultrasound uses sound waves to measure the speed and direction of blood flow. This test often is done with echo to give a more complete picture of blood flow to the heart and lungs.
                
Doctors often use Doppler ultrasound to help diagnose right-side heart failure.
                
Holter Monitor
                
A Holter monitor records your heart's electrical activity for a full 24- or 48-hour period, while you go about your normal daily routine.
                
You wear small patches called electrodes on your chest. Wires connect the patches to a small, portable recorder. The recorder can be clipped to a belt, kept in a pocket, or hung around your neck.
                
Nuclear Heart Scan
                
A nuclear heart scan shows how well blood is flowing through your heart and how much blood is reaching your heart muscle.
                
During a nuclear heart scan, a safe, radioactive substance called a tracer is injected into your bloodstream through a vein. The tracer travels to your heart and releases energy. Special cameras outside of your body detect the energy and use it to create pictures of your heart.
                
A nuclear heart scan can show where the heart muscle is healthy and where it's damaged.
                
A positron emission tomography (PET) scan is a type of nuclear heart scan. It shows the level of chemical activity in areas of your heart. This test can help your doctor see whether enough blood is flowing to these areas. A PET scan can show blood flow problems that other tests might not detect.
                
Cardiac Catheterization
                
During cardiac catheterization (KATH-eh-ter-ih-ZA-shun), a long, thin, flexible tube called a catheter is put into a blood vessel in your arm, groin (upper thigh), or neck and threaded to your heart. This allows your doctor to look inside your coronary (heart) arteries.
                
During this procedure, your doctor can check the pressure and blood flow in your heart chambers, collect blood samples, and use x rays to look at your coronary arteries.
                
Coronary Angiography
                
Coronary angiography (an-jee-OG-rah-fee) usually is done with cardiac catheterization. A dye that can be seen on x ray is injected into your bloodstream through the tip of the catheter.
                
The dye allows your doctor to see the flow of blood to your heart muscle. Angiography also shows how well your heart is pumping.
                
Stress Test
                
Some heart problems are easier to diagnose when your heart is working hard and beating fast. During stress testing, you exercise to make your heart work hard and beat fast.
                
You may walk or run on a treadmill or pedal a bicycle. If you can't exercise, you may be given medicine to raise your heart rate.
                
Heart tests, such as nuclear heart scanning and echo, often are done during stress testing.
                
Cardiac MRI
                
Cardiac MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) uses radio waves, magnets, and a computer to create pictures of your heart as it's beating. The test produces both still and moving pictures of your heart and major blood vessels.
                
A cardiac MRI can show whether parts of your heart are damaged. Doctors also have used MRI in research studies to find early signs of heart failure, even before symptoms appear.
                
Thyroid Function Tests
                
Thyroid function tests show how well your thyroid gland is working. These tests include blood tests, imaging tests, and tests to stimulate the thyroid. Having too much or too little thyroid hormone in the blood can lead to heart failure.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Heart Failure ?
A: Early diagnosis and treatment can help people who have heart failure live longer, more active lives. Treatment for heart failure depends on the type and severity of the heart failure.
                
The goals of treatment for all stages of heart failure include:
                
Treating the conditions underlying cause, such ascoronary heart disease,high blood pressure, ordiabetes
                
Reducing symptoms
                
Stopping the heart failure from getting worse
                
Increasing your lifespan and improving your quality of life
                
Treatments usually include lifestyle changes, medicines, and ongoing care. If you have severe heart failure, you also may need medical procedures or surgery.
                
Heart-Healthy Lifestyle Changes
                
Your doctor may recommend heart-healthy lifestyle changes if you have heart failure. Heart-healthy lifestyle changes include:
                
Heart-healthy eating
                
Maintaining a healthy weight
                
Physical activity
                
Quitting smoking
                
Heart-Healthy Eating
                
Your doctor may recommend a heart-healthy eating plan, which should include:
                
Fat-free or low-fat dairy products, such as skim milk
                
Fish high in omega-3 fatty acids, such as salmon, tuna, and trout, about twice a week
                
Fruits, such as apples, bananas, oranges, pears, and prunes
                
Legumes, such as kidney beans, lentils, chickpeas, black-eyed peas, and lima beans
                
Vegetables, such as broccoli, cabbage, and carrots
                
Whole grains, such as oatmeal, brown rice, and corn tortillas
                
When following a heart-healthy diet, you should avoid eating:
                
A lot of red meat
                
Palm and coconut oils
                
Sugary foods and beverages
                
Two nutrients in your diet make blood cholesterol levels rise:
                
Saturated fatfound mostly in foods that come from animals
                
Trans fat (trans fatty acids)found in foods made with hydrogenated oils and fats, such as stick margarine; baked goods, such as cookies, cakes, and pies; crackers; frostings; and coffee creamers. Some trans fats also occur naturally in animal fats andmeats.
                
Saturated fat raises your blood cholesterol more than anything else in your diet. When you follow a heart-healthy eating plan, only 5 percent to 6 percent of your daily calories should come from saturated fat. Food labels list the amounts of saturated fat. To help you stay on track, here are some examples:
                
If you eat:
                
Try to eat no more than:
                
1,200 calories a day                
                
8 grams of saturated fat a day      
                
1,500 calories a day
                
10 grams of saturated fat a day
                
1,800 calories a day
                
12 grams of saturated fat a day
                
2,000 calories a day
                
13 grams of saturated fat a day
                
2,500 calories a day
                
17 grams of saturated fat a day
                
Not all fats are bad. Monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats actually help lower blood cholesterollevels.
                
Some sources of monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats are:
                
Avocados
                
Corn, sunflower, and soybean oils
                
Nuts and seeds, such as walnuts
                
Olive, canola, peanut, safflower, and sesame oils
                
Peanut butter
                
Salmon and trout
                
Tofu
                
Sodium
                
You should try to limit the amount of sodium that you eat. This means choosing and preparing foods that are lower in salt and sodium. Try to use low-sodium and no added salt foods and seasonings at the table or while cooking. Food labels tell you what you need to know about choosing foods that are lower in sodium. Try to eat no more than 2,300 milligrams of sodium a day. If you have high blood pressure, you may need to restrict your sodium intake even more.
                
Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension
                
Your doctor may recommend the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) eating plan if you have high blood pressure. The DASH eating plan focuses on fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and other foods that are heart healthy and low in fat, cholesterol, and sodium and salt.
                
The DASH eating plan is a good heart-healthy eating plan, even for those who dont have high blood pressure. Read more about DASH.
                
Liquid Intake
                
Its important for people who have heart failure to take in the correct amounts and types of liquids. Consuming too much liquid can worsen heart failure. Also, if you have heart failure, you shouldnt drink alcohol. Talk with your doctor about what amounts and types of liquids you should have each day.
                
Maintaining a Healthy Weight
                
Maintaining a healthy weight is important for overall health and can lower your risk for heart failure and coronary heart disease. Aim for a Healthy Weight by following a heart-healthy eating plan and keeping physically active.
                
Knowing your body mass index (BMI) helps you find out if youre a healthy weight in relation to your height and gives an estimate of your total body fat. To figure out your BMI, check out the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institutes (NHLBI) online BMI calculator or talk to your doctor. A BMI:
                
Below 18.5 is a sign that you are underweight.
                
Between 18.5 and 24.9 is in the normal range.
                
Between 25 and 29.9 is considered overweight.
                
Of 30 or more is considered obese.
                
A general goal to aim for is a BMI below 25. Your doctor or health care provider can help you set an appropriate BMI goal.
                
Measuring waist circumference helps screen for possible health risks. If most of your fat is around your waist rather than at your hips, youre at a higher risk for heart disease and type 2 diabetes. This risk may be higher with a waist size that is greater than 35 inches for women or greater than 40 inches for men. To learn how to measure your waist, visit Assessing Your Weight and Health Risk.
                
If youre overweight or obese, try to lose weight. A loss of just 3 percent to 5 percent of your current weight can lower your triglycerides, blood glucose, and the risk of developing type 2 diabetes. Greater amounts of weight loss can improve blood pressure readings, lower LDL cholesterol, and increase HDL cholesterol.
                
Physical Activity
                
Routine physical activity can lower many coronary heart disease risk factors, including LDL (bad) cholesterol, high blood pressure, and excess weight. Physical activity also can lower your risk for diabetes and raise your HDL cholesterol level. HDL is the good cholesterol that helps prevent coronary heart disease.
                
Everyone should try to participate in moderate-intensity aerobic exercise at least 2hours and 30minutes per week, or vigorous aerobic exercise for 1hour and 15minutes per week. Aerobic exercise, such as brisk walking, is any exercise in which your heart beats faster and you use more oxygen than usual. The more active you are, the more you will benefit. Participate in aerobic exercise for at least 10minutes at a time spread throughout the week.
                
Read more about physical activity at:
                
Physical Activity and Your Heart
                
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines forAmericans
                
Talk with your doctor before you start a new exercise plan. Ask your doctor how much and what kinds of physical activity are safe for you.
                
Quitting Smoking
                
If you smoke, quit. Smoking can raise your risk for coronary heart disease and heart attack and worsen heart failure. Talk with your doctor about programs and products that can help you quit smoking. Also, try to avoid secondhand smoke.
                
If you have trouble quitting smoking on your own, consider joining a support group. Many hospitals, workplaces, and community groups offer classes to help people quit smoking.
                
Read more about quitting smoking at Smoking and Your Heart.
                
Medicines
                
Your doctor will prescribe medicines based on the type of heart failure you have, how severe it is, and your response to certain medicines. The following medicines are commonly used to treat heart failure:
                
ACE inhibitors lower blood pressure and reduce strain on your heart. They also may reduce the risk of a futureheart attack.
                
Aldosterone antagonists trigger the body to remove excess sodium through urine. This lowers the volume of blood that the heart must pump.
                
Angiotensin receptor blockers relax your blood vessels and lower blood pressure to decrease your hearts workload.
                
Beta blockers slow your heart rate and lower your blood pressure to decrease your hearts workload.
                
Digoxin makes the heart beat stronger and pump more blood.
                
Diuretics (fluid pills) help reduce fluid buildup in your lungs and swelling in your feet and ankles.
                
Isosorbide dinitrate/hydralazine hydrochloride helps relax your blood vessels so your heart doesnt work as hard to pump blood. Studies have shown that this medicine can reduce the risk of death in blacks. More studies are needed to find out whether this medicine will benefit other racial groups.
                
Take all medicines regularly, as your doctor prescribes. Dont change the amount of your medicine or skip a dose unless your doctor tells you to. You should still follow a heart healthy lifestyle, even if you take medicines to treat your heart failure.
                
Ongoing Care
                
You should watch for signs that heart failure is getting worse. For example, weight gain may mean that fluids are building up in your body. Ask your doctor how often you should check your weight and when to report weight changes.
                
Getting medical care for other related conditions is important. If you have diabetes or high blood pressure, work with your health care team to control these conditions. Have your blood sugar level and blood pressure checked. Talk with your doctor about when you should have tests and how often to take measurements at home.
                
Try to avoid respiratory infections like the flu andpneumonia. Talk with your doctor or nurse about getting flu and pneumonia vaccines.
                
Many people who have severe heart failure may need treatment in a hospital from time to time. Your doctor may recommend oxygen therapy, which can be given in a hospital or at home.
                
Medical Procedures and Surgery
                
As heart failure worsens, lifestyle changes and medicines may no longer control your symptoms. You may need a medical procedure or surgery.
                
In heart failure, the right and left sides of the heart may no longer contract at the same time. This disrupts the hearts pumping. To correct this problem, your doctor might implant a cardiac resynchronization therapy device (a type ofpacemaker) near your heart. This device helps both sides of your heart contract at the same time, which can decrease heart failure symptoms.
                
Some people who have heart failure have very rapid, irregular heartbeats. Without treatment, these heartbeats can causesudden cardiac arrest. Your doctor might implant an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) near your heart to solve this problem. An ICD checks your heart rate and uses electrical pulses to correct irregular heart rhythms.
                
People who have severe heart failure symptoms at rest, despite other treatments, may need:
                
A mechanical heart pump, such as aleft ventricular assist device. This device helps pump blood from the heart to the rest of the body. You may use a heart pump until you have surgery or as a long-term treatment.
                
Heart transplant. A heart transplant is an operation in which a persons diseased heart is replaced with a healthy heart from a deceased donor. Heart transplants are done as a life-saving measure for end-stage heart failure when medical treatment and less drastic surgery have failed.

---

Q: How to prevent Heart Failure ?
A: You can take steps to prevent heart failure. The sooner you start, the better your chances of preventing or delaying the condition.
                
For People Who Have Healthy Hearts
                
If you have a healthy heart, you can take action to prevent heart disease and heart failure. To reduce your risk of heart disease:
                
Avoid using illegal drugs.
                
Be physically active. The more active you are, the more you will benefit.
                
Follow a heart-healthy eating plan.
                
If yousmoke, make an effort to quit. Talk with your doctor about programs and products that can help you quit smoking. Also, try to avoid secondhand smoke.
                
Maintain a healthy weight. Work with your health care team to create a reasonable weight-loss plan.
                
For People Who Are at High Risk for Heart Failure
                
Even if youre at high risk for heart failure, you can take steps to reduce your risk. People at high risk include those who have coronary heart disease,high blood pressure, ordiabetes.
                
Follow all of the steps listed above. Talk with your doctor about what types and amounts of physical activity are safe for you.
                
Treat and control any conditions that can cause heart failure. Take medicines as your doctor prescribes.
                
Avoid drinking alcohol.
                
See your doctor for ongoing care.
                
For People Who Have Heart Damage but No Signs of Heart Failure
                
If you have heart damage but no signs of heart failure, you can still reduce your risk of developing the condition. In addition to the steps above, take your medicines as prescribed to reduce your hearts workload.