Topic: Hemophilia B

Q: What is (are) Hemophilia B ?
A: Hemophilia B is a bleeding disorder that slows the blood clotting process. People with this disorder experience prolonged bleeding or oozing following an injury or surgery. In severe cases of hemophilia, heavy bleeding occurs after minor injury or even in the absence of injury. Serious complications can result from bleeding into the joints, muscles, brain, or other internal organs. Milder forms may not become apparent until abnormal bleeding occurs following surgery or a serious injury. People with an unusual form of hemophilia B, known as hemophilia B Leyden, experience episodes of excessive bleeding in childhood but have few bleeding problems after puberty. Hemophilia B is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern and is caused by mutations in the F9 gene.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Hemophilia B ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Hemophilia B? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hemophilia B. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal bleeding - Degenerative joint disease - Gastrointestinal hemorrhage - Joint hemorrhage - Persistent bleeding after trauma - Prolonged partial thromboplastin time - Prolonged whole-blood clotting time - Reduced factor IX activity - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.