Topic: Hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1

Q: What is (are) Hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1 ?
A: Hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1 (HSN1) is a neurological condition characterized by nerve abnormalities in the legs and feet. Many people with this condition have tingling, weakness, and a reduced ability to feel pain and sense hot and cold. Some affected people do not lose sensation, but instead feel shooting pains in their legs and feet. As HSN1 progresses, sensory problems can affect the hands, arms, shoulders, and abdomen. In rare cases, people with this condition develop sensorineural hearing loss. Symptoms of HSN1 typically begin during a person's teens or twenties and worsen over time.  HSN1 is caused by mutations in any of several genes, depending on the form of HSN1 (HSN1A is caused by mutations in the SPTLC1 gene; HSN1B is linked to a gene located in chromosome 3; HSN1C is caused by mutations in the SPTLC2 gene; HSN1D is caused by mutations in the ATL1 gene and HSN1E is caused by mutations in DNMT1 gene. All forms of HSN1 are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. If symptoms are treated properly, the condition does not appear to affect life expectancy.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1 ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the skin - Areflexia - Autoamputation (feet) - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Chronic axonal neuropathy - Decreased number of large peripheral myelinated nerve fibers - Decreased sensory nerve conduction velocity - Distal muscle weakness - Distal sensory impairment - Distal sensory loss of all modalities - Hyporeflexia - Osteomyelitis - Osteomyelitis or necrosis, distal, due to sensory neuropathy (feet) - Pes cavus - Sensorineural hearing impairment - Skeletal muscle atrophy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: Is Hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1 inherited ?
A: How is hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1 inherited? Hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1 (HSN1) is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having only one changed (mutated) copy of the responsible gene in each cell is enough to cause signs and symptoms of the condition. When a person with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) risk to inherit the mutated gene from the affected parent. In rare cases, a mutation that causes HSN1 occurs sporadically as a new (de novo) mutation in a person without an affected parent.

---

Q: How to diagnose Hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1 ?
A: Is genetic testing available for hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1? At least four genes responsible for hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1 (HSN1) have been found: HSN1A (the most common form) is associated with mutations in the SPTLC1 gene HSN1B, reported in a small number of families, is linked to a specific location on chromosome 3, but the exact gene has not yet been identified HSN1C is caused by mutations in the SPTLC2 gene HSN1D is caused by mutations in the ATL1 gene (the same gene is associated with early-onset hereditary spastic paraplegia 3A) HSN1E is caused by mutations in the DNMT1 gene The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) provides information about genetic testing for HSN1A. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional. Although the genes for some other types of HSN1 have been identified, we are not aware of clinical laboratories that offer genetic testing for them. A genetics professional may be able to help you locate laboratories that offer testing for other types of HSN1. If the genetic mutation in an affected person has been identified, testing for adult relatives at risk for developing symptoms may be possible. This is called predictive genetic testing. However, this testing is not useful in predicting age of onset, severity, type of symptoms, or rate of progression in people who currently don't have symptoms.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1 ?
A: How might hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1 be treated? Management of hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1 generally follows the guidelines for diabetic foot care, including careful cleansing and protection of wounds and surgical care when needed. Pain medications may be used by those who experience shooting pains.