Topic: Hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis

Q: What is (are) Hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis ?
A: Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is a neurological condition in which amyloid protein is deposited onto the walls of the arteries of the brain (and less frequently, veins).  Although CAA often does not cause symptoms, it may cause bleeding into the brain (hemorrhagic stroke), dementia, or neurologic episodes in some patients.  The majority of CAA cases occur in individuals who do not have a family history. However, two familial forms of CAA have been identified.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis ?
A: What symptoms may be associated with hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis - Dutch type? Approximately 87% of individuals with hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis - Dutch type have intracranial hemorrhage (bleeding in the brain) and 13% have infarcts (stroke). The first stroke usually occurs between the ages of 45 and 65 years, and is not caused by hypertension or hemorrhagic diathesis (bleeding tendency). Nausea, vomiting, progressive headache, focal neurological signs (double or decreased vision, speech difficulties, confusion, delirium, weakness or paralysis, sensation changes or loss of sensation, progressive intellectual deterioration and memory disturbance) and impairment of consciousness are the most frequent signs and symptoms. Psychiatric abnormalities, including dementia are also common, with some patients developing dementia without intracranial hemorrhage.

---

Q: What causes Hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis ?
A: What causes hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis - Dutch type? The clinical symptoms of hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis - Dutch type are caused by the build-up of a protein called amyloid within the arterial walls of the brain. This protein build-up causes bleeding into the brain. The symptoms occur because bleeding in the brain harms brain tissue. Hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis-Dutch type is an autosomal dominant disorder with complete penetrance (all individuals who inherit the mutated gene will develop the condition). The likely genetic defect is in the amyloid protein precursor protein (APP) gene on chromosome 21.

---

Q: Is Hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis inherited ?
A: Since I have a family history of hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis, what are the chances that I inherited the condition? To find out your chances of having hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis, you may want to speak with a genetics professional. A genetics professionl can review your medical and family history in order to provide you with your specific risks. To learn more about genetic consultations, click here.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis ?
A: How might hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis - Dutch type be treated? There is no known effective treatment for hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis - Dutch type. Treatment is supportive and based on the control of symptoms. In some cases, rehabilitation is needed for weakness or clumsiness. This can include physical, occupational, or speech therapy. Occasionally, some patients are good candidates for medications that can help improve memory. The management of intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) related to hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis - Dutch type is identical to the standard management of ICH. The main objectives include reversing anticoagulation, managing intracranial pressure, and preventing complications.