Topic: HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis

Q: What is (are) HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis ?
A: HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) is a chronic, progressive disease of the nervous system that affects less than 2 percent of people with HTLV-1 infection. Signs and symptoms vary but may include progressive weakness, stiff muscles, muscle spasms, backache, a 'weak' bladder, and constipation. The HTLV-1 virus can be transmitted from mother to child via breastfeeding or childbirth, from person to person through sexual contact and through blood contact, either by transfusion or by reuse of injection equipment. HTLV infection is not passed from person to person by coughing, sneezing, kissing, cuddling or daily social contact. Screening of donated blood for HTLV-1 has been done in the United States since 1988.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis? Signs and symptoms of HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) vary but may include: Progressive weakness  Stiff muscles  Muscle spasms  Backache A 'weak' bladder  Constipation Rarely HAM/TSP may cause: Uveitis  Arthritis Inflammation of the lung  Polymyositis  Dry eyes (keratoconjunctivitis sicca)  Skin inflammation (infectious dermatitis)

---

Q: What are the treatments for HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis ?
A: How might HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) be treated? There is no established treatment program for HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP).  Corticosteroids may relieve some symptoms, but arent likely to change the course of the disorder.  Clinical studies suggest that interferon alpha provides benefits over short periods and some aspects of disease activity may be improved favorably using interferon beta. Stiff and spastic muscles may be treated with lioresal or tizanidine.  Urinary dysfunction may be treated with oxybutynin.