Topic: Human Growth Hormone and Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Resource List

Q: What is (are) Human Growth Hormone and Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Resource List ?
A: MAGIC (Major Aspects of Growth in Children) Foundation is a national, nonprofit organization that provides support and education about growth disorders in children and growth hormone deficiency in adults. Staff will help connect people who have similar interests or concerns.
                
The Human Growth Foundation (HGF) is a nonprofit organization concerned with childrens growth disorders and adult growth hormone deficiency. The HGF offers a brochure about adult growth hormone deficiency. The foundation also sponsors adult and pediatric Internet discussion forums to support the exchange of information about growth hormone deficiency and growth hormone replacement therapy. To subscribe, follow the instructions at www.hgfound.org.
                
The Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) Foundation, Inc. was created in 1993 by two families who lost relatives to CJD and the neurologist who treated the patients. This nonprofit corporation seeks to promote awareness of CJD through research and education and to reach out to people who have lost loved ones to this illness.

---

Q: What is (are) Human Growth Hormone and Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Resource List ?
A: Health Alert: Adrenal Crisis Causes Death in Some People Who Were Treated with Human Growth Hormone
                
National Hormone and Pituitary Program (NHPP): Information for People Treated with Pituitary Human Growth Hormone (Summary)
                
National Hormone and Pituitary Program (NHPP): Information for People Treated with Pituitary Human Growth Hormone (Comprehensive Report)
                
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease. Fact sheet of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health (NIH)
                
NIH and Italian Scientists Develop Nasal Test for Human Prion Disease
                
What is a prion?from Scientific American: Ask the Experts