Topic: Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1

Q: What is (are) Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 ?
A: Human T-cell leukemia virus, type 1 (HTLV-1) is a retroviral infection that affect the T cells (a type of white blood cell). Although this virus generally causes no signs or symptoms, some affected people may later develop adult T-cell leukemia (ATL), HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) or other medical conditions. HTLV-1 is spread by blood transfusions, sexual contact and sharing needles. It can also be spread from mother to child during birth or breast-feeding. There is no cure or treatment for HTLV-1 and it is considered a lifelong condition; however, most (95%) infected people remain asymptomatic (show no symptoms) throughout life.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of human T-cell leukemia virus, type 1? Human T-cell leukemia virus, type 1 (HTLV-1) generally causes no signs or symptoms. However, some affected people may later develop adult T-cell leukemia (ATL), HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) or other medical conditions. Approximately 2-5% of people with HTLV-1 will develop ATL, a cancer of the T-cells (a type of white blood cell). The signs and symptoms of this condition and the disease progression vary from person to person. Affected people may have the following features: Fatigue Lymphadenopathy (swollen lymph nodes) Thirst Nausea and vomiting Fever Skin and bone abnormalities Enlarged liver and/or spleen Frequent infections Roughly .25-2% of people with HTLV-1 will develop HAM/TSP, a chronic, progressive disease of the nervous system. Signs and symptoms of this condition vary but may include: Progressive weakness Stiff muscles Muscle spasms Backache 'Weak' bladder Constipation

---

Q: What causes Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 ?
A: What causes human T-cell leukemia virus, type 1? Human T-cell leukemia virus, type 1 (HTLV-1) occurs when a person is infected by the human T-cell leukemia retrovirus. HTLV-1 is spread by blood transfusions, sexual contact and sharing needles. It can also be spread from mother to child during birth or breast-feeding. It is unclear why some people with HTLV-1 develop adult T-cell leukemia (ATL), HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) or other medical conditions, while others remain asymptomatic (show no signs or symptoms) their entire lives.

---

Q: How to diagnose Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 ?
A: How is human T-cell leukemia virus, type 1 diagnosed? Human T-cell leukemia virus, type 1 (HTLV-1) is usually diagnosed based on blood tests that detect antibodies to the virus. However, HTLV-1 is often never suspected or diagnosed since most people (95%) never develop any signs or symptoms of the infection. Diagnosis may occur during screening for blood donation, testing performed due to a family history of the infection, or a work-up for an HTLV-1-associated condition such as adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) or HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP).

---

Q: What are the treatments for Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 ?
A: How might human T-cell leukemia virus, type 1 be treated?  No cure or treatment exists for human T-cell leukemia virus, type 1 (HTLV-1). Management is focused on early detection and preventing the spread of HTLV-1 to others. Screening blood doners, promoting safe sex and discouraging needle sharing can decrease the number of new infections. Mother-to-child transmission can be reduced by screening pregnant women so infected mothers can avoid breastfeeding.