Topic: HurlerScheie syndrome

Q: What are the symptoms of HurlerScheie syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of HurlerScheie syndrome ? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for HurlerScheie syndrome . If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 90% Abnormality of the heart valves 90% Abnormality of the tonsils 90% Coarse facial features 90% Hepatomegaly 90% Hernia 90% Limitation of joint mobility 90% Opacification of the corneal stroma 90% Short stature 90% Sinusitis 90% Skeletal dysplasia 90% Splenomegaly 90% Abnormal pyramidal signs 50% Decreased nerve conduction velocity 50% Sensorineural hearing impairment 50% Spinal canal stenosis 50% Hypertrichosis 7.5% Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 7.5% Aortic regurgitation - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Corneal opacity - Depressed nasal bridge - Dysostosis multiplex - Hirsutism - Joint stiffness - Kyphosis - Mitral regurgitation - Obstructive sleep apnea - Pulmonary hypertension - Recurrent respiratory infections - Scoliosis - Thick vermilion border - Tracheal stenosis - Umbilical hernia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.