Topic: Hydrops, Ectopic calcification, Moth-eaten skeletal dysplasia

Q: What is (are) Hydrops, Ectopic calcification, Moth-eaten skeletal dysplasia ?
A: HEM (hydrops fetalis, ectopic calcifications, "moth-eaten" skeletal dysplasia) is a very rare type of lethal skeletal dysplasia. According to the reported cases of HEM in the medical literature, the condition's main features are hydrops fetalis, dwarfism with severely shortened limbs and relatively normal-sized hands and feet, a "moth-eaten" appearance of the skeleton, flat vertebral bodies and ectopic calcifications. HEM is an autosomal recessive condition caused by a mutation in the lamin B receptor (LBR) gene. No treatment or cure is currently known for HEM.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Hydrops, Ectopic calcification, Moth-eaten skeletal dysplasia ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Hydrops, Ectopic calcification, Moth-eaten skeletal dysplasia? The diagnostic findings of HEM (hydrops fetalis, severe micromelia, and ectopic calcification) have been present in all cases reported in the medical literature thus far. The following are several of the other signs and symptoms that have been reported in some patients with HEM : Polydactyly (presence of more than 5 fingers on the hands or 5 toes on the feet) Reduced number of ribs Omphalocele Intestinal malformation Abnormal fingernails Less than normal number of lobes in the lung (hypolobated lungs) Cystic hygroma The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hydrops, Ectopic calcification, Moth-eaten skeletal dysplasia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of bone mineral density 90% Abnormality of erythrocytes 90% Abnormality of pelvic girdle bone morphology 90% Abnormality of the ribs 90% Brachydactyly syndrome 90% Limb undergrowth 90% Lymphedema 90% Short stature 90% Decreased skull ossification 50% Malar flattening 50% Narrow chest 50% Skull defect 50% Toxemia of pregnancy 50% 11 pairs of ribs - Abnormal foot bone ossification - Abnormal joint morphology - Abnormal lung lobation - Abnormal ossification involving the femoral head and neck - Abnormal pelvis bone ossification - Abnormality of cholesterol metabolism - Abnormality of the calcaneus - Abnormality of the scapula - Abnormality of the vertebral spinous processes - Absent or minimally ossified vertebral bodies - Absent toenail - Anterior rib punctate calcifications - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Barrel-shaped chest - Bone marrow hypocellularity - Bowing of the long bones - Broad palm - Cardiomegaly - Cystic hygroma - Depressed nasal bridge - Diaphyseal thickening - Disproportionate short-limb short stature - Epiphyseal stippling - Extramedullary hematopoiesis - Flared metaphysis - Hepatic calcification - Hepatomegaly - Hepatosplenomegaly - High forehead - Horizontal sacrum - Hypertelorism - Hypoplasia of the maxilla - Hypoplastic fingernail - Hypoplastic vertebral bodies - Intestinal malrotation - Laryngeal calcification - Lethal skeletal dysplasia - Long clavicles - Low-set ears - Macrocephaly - Mesomelia - Metaphyseal cupping - Micromelia - Misalignment of teeth - Multiple prenatal fractures - Neonatal death - Nonimmune hydrops fetalis - Omphalocele - Pancreatic islet-cell hyperplasia - Patchy variation in bone mineral density - Pleural effusion - Polyhydramnios - Postaxial foot polydactyly - Postaxial hand polydactyly - Pulmonary hypoplasia - Punctate vertebral calcifications - Rhizomelia - Sandal gap - Sclerosis of skull base - Severe hydrops fetalis - Short diaphyses - Short phalanx of finger - Short ribs - Sternal punctate calcifications - Stillbirth - Supernumerary vertebral ossification centers - Tracheal calcification - Ulnar deviation of the hand - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Hydrops, Ectopic calcification, Moth-eaten skeletal dysplasia ?
A: What causes HEM? HEM is associated with mutations (changes) in the lamin B receptor (LBR) gene located on chromosome 1, specifically at 1q42.1.  Each person has two copies of the LBR gene - one inherited from mom and the other from dad. People who have two mutated copies of the LBR gene have HEM; thus, the condition is said to be inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. The presence of two mutated copies of the LBR gene may affect the structure of the nucleus of the cell as well.

---

Q: How to diagnose Hydrops, Ectopic calcification, Moth-eaten skeletal dysplasia ?
A: How is HEM diagnosed? Establishing a diagnosis of HEM prenatally can be difficult and may require the interaction between a perinatologist, geneticist, and fetal/neonatal pathologist. Clinical examination, radiographs, genetic testing, and autopsy may be performed in order to establish a diagnosis of HEM.