Topic: Hyperprolinemia type 2

Q: What is (are) Hyperprolinemia type 2 ?
A: Hyperprolinemia type 2 results in an excess of a particular protein building block (amino acid), called proline, in the blood. This condition generally occurs when proline is not broken down properly by the body. Hyperprolinemia type 2 causes proline levels in the blood to be 10 to 15 times higher than normal, and it also causes high levels of a related compound called pyrroline-5-carboxylate. Some people with this condition develop mild mental retardation and seizures; however, the symptoms of this disorder vary in severity among affected individuals.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Hyperprolinemia type 2 ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Hyperprolinemia type 2? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hyperprolinemia type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Hydroxyprolinuria - Hyperglycinuria - Hyperprolinemia - Intellectual disability - Prolinuria - Seizures - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Hyperprolinemia type 2 ?
A: How might hyperprolinemia type 2 be treated? There is no specific treatment for hyperprolinemia type 2, even for those individuals who experience seizures. In general, if people with hyperprolinemia type 2 have symptoms, they are usually mild and do not require treatment. If seizures are present during childhood, they tend to disappear in adulthood. Attempts to reduce the amount of proline in an affected person's diet have resulted in only modest control of proline levels in the blood and have not reduced symptoms.