Topic: Hyper-IgD syndrome

Q: What is (are) Hyper-IgD syndrome ?
A: Hyper IgD syndrome is an inflammatory genetic disorder characterized by periodic episodes of fever associated with additional symptoms including joint pain, skin rash and abdominal pain. Most episodes last several days and occur periodically throughout life. The frequency of episodes and their severity vary greatly from case to case.  Hyper IgD syndrome is caused by mutations in the gene encoding mevalonate kinase (MVK). It is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Hyper-IgD syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Hyper-IgD syndrome? Hyper IgD syndrome is characterized by periodic high fevers accompanied by lymphadenopathy, abdominal pain, diarrhea, headache, joint pain, hepatomegaly and/or splenomegaly, and skin lesions. Most episodes last several days and occur periodically throughout life. The frequency of episodes and their severity vary greatly from case to case. The first attack usually takes place during infancy. Patients may have no symptoms between attacks. However, in some patients, the attacks may be so frequent that the symptoms persist. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hyper-IgD syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abdominal pain 90% Abnormality of temperature regulation 90% Arthralgia 90% Gastrointestinal hemorrhage 90% Hepatomegaly 90% Lymphadenopathy 90% Myalgia 90% Abnormality of the oral cavity 50% Arthritis 50% Diarrhea 50% Migraine 50% Urticaria 50% Vasculitis 50% Abnormal immunoglobulin level 7.5% Acrocyanosis 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Incoordination 7.5% Intestinal obstruction 7.5% Limitation of joint mobility 7.5% Peritonitis 7.5% Seizures 7.5% Subcutaneous hemorrhage 7.5% Rod-cone dystrophy 5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate - Headache - Hypermelanotic macule - Increased IgA level - Leukocytosis - Nyctalopia - Optic disc pallor - Skin rash - Splenomegaly - Vertigo - Vomiting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Hyper-IgD syndrome ?
A: What causes hyper IgD syndrome? Hyper IgD syndrome is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the enzyme mevalonate kinase (MVK). The mutations lead to a decrease in the enzymatic activity of the gene. The gene is located at chromosome 12q24.

---

Q: Is Hyper-IgD syndrome inherited ?
A: Is hyper IgD syndrome inherited? Hyper IgD syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. About one half of patients have a positive family history.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Hyper-IgD syndrome ?
A: How might hyper IgD syndrome be treated? There is no cure for hyper IgD syndrome and currently no established treatment.  Management is focused on supportive care. Some patients have responded to high-dose prednisone. Simvastatin, Anakinria (an IL-1 receptor antagonist) and TNF inhibitors have recently shown some success in controlling inflammatory attacks.   Consultations with the following specialists may be helpful: dermatologist, rheumatologist, and infectious disease specialist (to evaluate periodic fever).