Topic: Hypothalamic dysfunction

Q: What is (are) Hypothalamic dysfunction ?
A: Hypothalamic dysfunction refers to a condition in which the hypothalamus is not working properly. The hypothalamus produces hormones that control body temperature, hunger, moods, release of hormones from many glands such as the pituitary gland, sex drive, sleep, and thirst. The signs and symptoms patients have vary depending on the hormones missing. A number of different causes including anorexia, bleeding, genetic disorder, tumors, and more have been linked to hypothalamic dysfunction. Treatment depends on the cause of the hypothalamic dysfunction.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Hypothalamic dysfunction ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of hypothalamic dysfunction? The signs and symptoms of hypothalamic dysfunction may vary from person to person depending on the specific hormones missing. You can read more by visiting the following link from MedlinePlus. http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/001202.htm

---

Q: What causes Hypothalamic dysfunction ?
A: What causes hypothalamic dysfunction? Hypothalamic dysfunction may be caused by any of the following : Birth defects of the brain or hypothalamus (e.g. holoprosencephaly, septo-optic dysplasia) Genetic disorders (e.g. Prader-Willi syndrome, growth hormone deficiency) Eating disorders (e.g. anorexia, bulimia) Tumors (e.g. craniopharyngiomas, germinomas, meningiomas, gliomas, ependymomas, and gliomas of the optic nerve) Head trauma (e.g. boxing and varied injuries, birth trauma) Bacterial, viral, or fungal infections Autoimmune disorders (e.g. sarcoidosis) Malnutrition Cranial radiation Surgery Too much iron In some cases of hypothalamic dysfunction, the cause is unknown; these cases are referred to as having idiopathic hypothalamic dysfunction.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Hypothalamic dysfunction ?
A: How might hypothalamic dysfunction be treated? Treatment is based on the specific cause of the hypothalamic dysfunction. For instance, if the condition is caused by a tumor, radiation and/or surgery may be warranted. If the hypothalamic dysfunction is caused by a hormone deficiency, the condition might be treated with hormone supplementation. If the cause is unknown, treatment may be symptomatic. To date, no successful treatment has been reported for idiopathic hypothalamic dysfunction.