Topic: Hypothyroidism

Q: What is (are) Hypothyroidism ?
A: Your thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in your neck, just above your collarbone. It is one of your endocrine glands, which make hormones. Thyroid hormones control the rate of many activities in your body. These include how fast you burn calories and how fast your heart beats. All of these activities are your body's metabolism. If your thyroid gland is not active enough, it does not make enough thyroid hormone to meet your body's needs. This condition is hypothyroidism.    Hypothyroidism is more common in women, people with other thyroid problems, and those over 60 years old. Hashimoto's disease, an autoimmune disorder, is the most common cause. Other causes include thyroid nodules, thyroiditis, congenital hypothyroidism, surgical removal of part or all of the thyroid, radiation treatment of the thyroid, and some medicines.    The symptoms can vary from person to person. They may include       - Fatigue    - Weight gain    - A puffy face    - Cold intolerance    - Joint and muscle pain    - Constipation    - Dry skin    - Dry, thinning hair    - Decreased sweating    - Heavy or irregular menstrual periods and fertility problems    - Depression    - Slowed heart rate       To diagnose hypothyroidism, your doctor will look at your symptoms and blood tests. Treatment is with synthetic thyroid hormone, taken every day.    NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

---

Q: What is (are) Hypothyroidism ?
A: Hypothyroidism is a disorder that occurs when the thyroid gland does not make enough thyroid hormone to meet the bodys needs. Thyroid hormone regulates metabolismthe way the body uses energyand affects nearly every organ in the body. Without enough thyroid hormone, many of the bodys functions slow down. About 4.6 percent of the U.S. population age 12 and older has hypothyroidism.1

---

Q: What is (are) Hypothyroidism ?
A: The thyroid is a 2-inch-long, butterfly-shaped gland weighing less than 1 ounce. Located in the front of the neck below the larynx, or voice box, it has two lobes, one on each side of the windpipe. The thyroid is one of the glands that make up the endocrine system. The glands of the endocrine system produce and store hormones and release them into the bloodstream. The hormones then travel through the body and direct the activity of the bodys cells.
                
The thyroid gland makes two thyroid hormones, triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4). T3 is made from T4 and is the more active hormone, directly affecting the tissues. Thyroid hormones affect metabolism, brain development, breathing, heart and nervous system functions, body temperature, muscle strength, skin dryness, menstrual cycles, weight, and cholesterol levels.

---

Q: What causes Hypothyroidism ?
A: Hypothyroidism has several causes, including
                
- Hashimotos disease  - thyroiditis, or inflammation of the thyroid  - congenital hypothyroidism, or hypothyroidism that is present at birth  - surgical removal of part or all of the thyroid  - radiation treatment of the thyroid  - some medications
                
Less commonly, hypothyroidism is caused by too much or too little iodine in the diet or by abnormalities of the pituitary gland.
                
Hashimotos Disease
                
Hashimotos disease, also called chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis, is the most common cause of hypothyroidism in the United States.1 Hashimotos disease is a form of chronic inflammation of the thyroid gland. Hashimotos disease is also an autoimmune disorder.
                
Normally, the immune system protects the body against foreign invaderssuch as viruses and bacteriathat can cause illness. But in autoimmune diseases, the immune system attacks the bodys own cells and organs. With Hashimotos disease, the immune system attacks the thyroid, causing inflammation and interfering with its ability to produce thyroid hormones.
                
More information is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Hashimotos Disease.
                
Thyroiditis
                
Thyroiditis causes stored thyroid hormone to leak out of the thyroid gland. At first, the leakage raises hormone levels in the blood, leading to hyperthyroidismwhen thyroid hormone levels are too highthat lasts for 1 or 2 months. Most people then develop hypothyroidism before the thyroid is completely healed.
                
Several types of thyroiditis can cause hyperthyroidism followed by hypothyroidism:
                
- Subacute thyroiditis. This condition involves painful inflammation and enlargement of the thyroid. Experts are not sure what causes subacute thyroiditis, but it may be related to a viral or bacterial infection. The condition usually goes away on its own in a few months.  - Postpartum thyroiditis. This type of thyroiditis develops after a woman gives birth. For more information, see the section titled What happens with pregnancy and thyroid conditions?  - Silent thyroiditis. This type of thyroiditis is called silent because it is painless, as is postpartum thyroiditis, even though the thyroid may be enlarged. Like postpartum thyroiditis, silent thyroiditis is probably an autoimmune condition and sometimes develops into permanent hypothyroidism.
                
Congenital Hypothyroidism
                
Some babies are born with a thyroid that is not fully developed or does not function properly. If untreated, congenital hypothyroidism can lead to mental retardation and growth failure. Early treatment can prevent these complications, so most newborns in the United States are screened for hypothyroidism.
                
Surgical Removal of the Thyroid
                
When part of the thyroid is removed, the remaining part may produce normal amounts of thyroid hormone, but some people who have this surgery develop hypothyroidism. Removal of the entire thyroid always results in hypothyroidism.
                
Part or all of the thyroid may be surgically removed as a treatment for
                
- hyperthyroidism  - a large goiter, which is an enlarged thyroid that may cause the neck to appear swollen and can interfere with normal breathing and swallowing  - thyroid nodules, which are noncancerous tumors, called adenomas, or lumps in the thyroid that can produce excess thyroid hormone  - thyroid cancer
                
Radiation Treatment of the Thyroid
                
Radioactive iodine, a common treatment for hyperthyroidism, gradually destroys the cells of the thyroid. Most people who receive radioactive iodine treatment eventually develop hypothyroidism. People with Hodgkins disease, other lymphomas, and head or neck cancers are treated with radiation, which can also damage the thyroid.
                
Medications
                
Some drugs can interfere with thyroid hormone production and lead to hypothyroidism, including
                
- amiodarone, a heart medication  - interferon alpha, a cancer medication  - lithium, a bipolar disorder medication  - interleukin-2, a kidney cancer medication

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Hypothyroidism ?
A: Hypothyroidism has many symptoms that can vary from person to person. Some common symptoms of hypothyroidism are
                
- fatigue  - weight gain  - a puffy face  - cold intolerance  - joint and muscle pain  - constipation  - dry skin  - dry, thinning hair  - decreased sweating  - heavy or irregular menstrual periods and impaired fertility  - depression  - slowed heart rate
                
However, hypothyroidism develops slowly, so many people dont notice symptoms of the disease.
                
Symptoms more specific to Hashimotos disease are a goiter and a feeling of fullness in the throat.
                
Hypothyroidism can contribute to high cholesterol, so people with high cholesterol should be tested for hypothyroidism. Rarely, severe, untreated hypothyroidism may lead to myxedema coma, an extreme form of hypothyroidism in which the bodys functions slow to the point that it becomes life threatening. Myxedema requires immediate medical treatment.

---

Q: How to diagnose Hypothyroidism ?
A: Many symptoms of hypothyroidism are the same as those of other diseases, so hypothyroidism usually cannot be diagnosed based on symptoms alone. With suspected hypothyroidism, health care providers take a medical history and perform a thorough physical examination. Health care providers may then use several blood tests to confirm a diagnosis of hypothyroidism and find its cause:
                
TSH test. The ultrasensitive TSH test is usually the first test a health care provider performs. This test detects even tiny amounts of TSH in the blood and is the most accurate measure of thyroid activity available. Generally, a TSH reading above normal means a person has hypothyroidism and a reading below normal means a person has hyperthyroidism.
                
Mildly elevated TSH without symptoms indicates subclinical hypothyroidism. Some health care providers treat subclinical hypothyroidism immediately. Others prefer to leave it untreated but monitor their patients for signs that the condition is worsening.
                
Health care providers may conduct additional tests to help confirm the diagnosis or determine the cause of hypothyroidism.
                
T4 test. This test measures the actual amount of circulating thyroid hormone in the blood. In hypothyroidism, the level of T4 in the blood is lower than normal.
                
Thyroid autoantibody test. This test looks for the presence of thyroid autoantibodies. Most people with Hashimotos disease have these antibodies, but people whose hypothyroidism is caused by other conditions do not.
                
More information about testing for thyroid problems is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Thyroid Tests.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Hypothyroidism ?
A: Health care providers treat hypothyroidism with synthetic thyroxine, a medication that is identical to the hormone T4. The exact dose will depend on the patients age and weight, the severity of the hypothyroidism, the presence of other health problems, and whether the person is taking other drugs that might interfere with how well the body uses thyroid hormone.
                
Health care providers test TSH levels about 6 to 8 weeks after a patient begins taking thyroid hormone and make any necessary adjustments to the dose. Each time the dose is adjusted, the blood is tested again. Once a stable dose is reached, blood tests are normally repeated in 6 months and then once a year.
                
Hypothyroidism can almost always be completely controlled with synthetic thyroxine, as long as the recommended dose is taken every day as instructed.

---

Q: What to do for Hypothyroidism ?
A: Experts recommend that people eat a balanced diet to obtain most nutrients. More information about diet and nutrition can be found on the National Agricultural Library website at www.nutrition.gov.
                
Dietary Supplements
                
Iodine is an essential mineral for the thyroid. However, people with autoimmune thyroid disease may be sensitive to harmful side effects from iodine. Taking iodine drops or eating foods containing large amounts of iodinesuch as seaweed, dulse, or kelpmay cause or worsen hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism. More information about iodine can be found in the National Library of Medicine fact sheet Iodine in diet, available at www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/002421.htm.
                
Women need more iodine when they are pregnantabout 250 micrograms a day because the baby gets iodine from the mothers diet. In the United States, about 7 percent of pregnant women may not get enough iodine in their diet or through prenatal vitamins.3 Choosing iodized salt salt supplemented with iodineover plain salt and prenatal vitamins containing iodine will ensure this need is met.
                
To help ensure coordinated and safe care, people should discuss their use of dietary supplements, such as iodine, with their health care provider. Tips for talking with health care providers are available through the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health.

---

Q: What to do for Hypothyroidism ?
A: - Hypothyroidism is a disorder that occurs when the thyroid gland does not make enough thyroid hormone to meet the bodys needs. Thyroid hormone regulates metabolism. Without enough thyroid hormone, many of the bodys functions slow down.  - Hypothyroidism has several causes, including      - Hashimotos disease    - thyroiditis    - congenital hypothyroidism    - surgical removal of part or all of the thyroid    - radiation treatment of the thyroid    - some medications    - Hypothyroidism has many symptoms that can vary from person to person. Some common symptoms of hypothyroidism are fatigue, weight gain, cold intolerance, constipation, impaired fertility, and depression.  - Women are much more likely than men to develop hypothyroidism.  - Women with hypothyroidism should discuss their condition with their health care provider before becoming pregnant.  - Hypothyroidism can almost always be completely controlled with synthetic thyroxine, as long as the recommended dose is taken every day as instructed.