Topic: Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura

Q: What is (are) Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura ?
A: Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is a bleeding disorder characterized by too few platelets in the blood. This is because platelets are being destroyed by the immune system. Symptoms may include bruising, nosebleed or bleeding in the mouth, bleeding into the skin, and abnormally heavy menstruation. With treatment, the chance of remission (a symptom-free period) is good. Rarely, ITP may become a chronic ailment in adults and reappear, even after remission.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal bleeding - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Platelet antibody positive - Thrombocytopenia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.