Topic: Idiopathic neutropenia

Q: What is (are) Idiopathic neutropenia ?
A: Idiopathic neutropenia is an acquired form of severe chronic neutropenia whose cause is unknown. Neutropenia is a blood condition that causes a reduced number or complete absence of neutrophils, a type of white blood cell that is responsible for much of the body's protection against infection. Symptoms include fever, moth sores, and other types of infections. Neutropenia idiopathic may occur in children and adults. Frequency and severity of infections appear to be directly related to neutrophil count; while clinical problems in individual patients may vary, in general, those patients with more severe neutropenia have more frequent infections. Most patients respond well to granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF). Long-term treatment is usually required.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Idiopathic neutropenia ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Idiopathic neutropenia? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Idiopathic neutropenia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Acute myeloid leukemia 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Neutropenia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.