Topic: Idiopathic acute eosinophilic pneumonia

Q: What is (are) Idiopathic acute eosinophilic pneumonia ?
A: Idiopathic acute eosinophilic pneumonia (IAEP) is characterized by the rapid accumulation of eosinophils in the lungs. Eosinophils are a type of white blood cell and are part of the immune system. IAEP can occur at any age but most commonly affects otherwise healthy individuals between 20 and 40 years of age. Signs and symptoms may include fever, cough, fatigue, difficulty breathing (dyspnea), muscle pain, and chest pain. IAEP can progress rapidly to acute respiratory failure. The term idiopathic means the exact cause for the overproduction of eosinophils is not known. Possible triggers of acute eosinophilic pneumonia include cigarette smoking, occupational exposure to dust and smoke, and certain medications. Diagnosis of IAEP generally involves a bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). Treatment with corticosteroids is effective in most cases. Because IAEP often progresses rapidly, respiratory failure can occur; in these cases, mechanical ventilation is required.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Idiopathic acute eosinophilic pneumonia ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Idiopathic acute eosinophilic pneumonia? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Idiopathic acute eosinophilic pneumonia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of temperature regulation 90% Chest pain 90% Pulmonary infiltrates 90% Respiratory insufficiency 90% Abdominal pain 50% Abnormal pattern of respiration 50% Abnormality of eosinophils 50% Abnormality of the pleura 50% Myalgia 50% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.