Topic: inclusion body myopathy with early-onset Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia

Q: What is (are) inclusion body myopathy with early-onset Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia ?
A: Inclusion body myopathy with early-onset Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD) is a condition that can affect the muscles, bones, and brain.  The first symptom of IBMPFD is often muscle weakness (myopathy), which typically appears in mid-adulthood. Weakness first occurs in muscles of the hips and shoulders, making it difficult to climb stairs and raise the arms above the shoulders. As the disorder progresses, weakness develops in other muscles in the arms and legs. Muscle weakness can also affect respiratory and heart (cardiac) muscles, leading to life-threatening breathing difficulties and heart failure.  About half of all adults with IBMPFD develop a disorder called Paget disease of bone. This disorder most often affects bones of the hips, spine, and skull, and the long bones of the arms and legs. Bone pain, particularly in the hips and spine, is usually the major symptom of Paget disease. Rarely, this condition can weaken bones so much that they break (fracture).  In about one-third of people with IBMPFD, the disorder also affects the brain. IBMPFD is associated with a brain condition called frontotemporal dementia, which becomes noticeable in a person's forties or fifties. Frontotemporal dementia progressively damages parts of the brain that control reasoning, personality, social skills, speech, and language. People with this condition initially may have trouble speaking, remembering words and names (dysnomia), and using numbers (dyscalculia). Personality changes, a loss of judgment, and inappropriate social behavior are also hallmarks of the disease. As the dementia worsens, affected people ultimately become unable to speak, read, or care for themselves.  People with IBMPFD usually live into their fifties or sixties.

---

Q: How many people are affected by inclusion body myopathy with early-onset Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia ?
A: Although the prevalence of IBMPFD is unknown, this condition is rare. It has been identified in about 26 families.

---

Q: What are the genetic changes related to inclusion body myopathy with early-onset Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia ?
A: Mutations in the VCP gene cause IBMPFD. The VCP gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called valosin-containing protein, which has a wide variety of functions within cells. One of its most critical jobs is to help break down (degrade) proteins that are abnormal or no longer needed.  Mutations in the VCP gene alter the structure of valosin-containing protein, disrupting its ability to break down other proteins. As a result, excess and abnormal proteins may build up in muscle, bone, and brain cells. The proteins form clumps that interfere with the normal functions of these cells. It remains unclear how damage to muscle, bone, and brain cells leads to the specific features of IBMPFD.

---

Q: Is inclusion body myopathy with early-onset Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia inherited ?
A: This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.

---

Q: What are the treatments for inclusion body myopathy with early-onset Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia ?
A: These resources address the diagnosis or management of IBMPFD:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Inclusion Body Myopathy with Paget Disease of Bone and/or Frontotemporal Dementia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Inclusion body myopathy with early-onset paget disease and frontotemporal dementia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care