Topic: Intellectual disability, epileptic seizures, hypogonadism and hypogenitalism, microcephaly, and obesity

Q: What are the symptoms of Intellectual disability, epileptic seizures, hypogonadism and hypogenitalism, microcephaly, and obesity ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Intellectual disability, epileptic seizures, hypogonadism and hypogenitalism, microcephaly, and obesity? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Intellectual disability, epileptic seizures, hypogonadism and hypogenitalism, microcephaly, and obesity. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the eyelashes 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Cryptorchidism 90% EEG abnormality 90% Hypoplasia of penis 90% Microcephaly 90% Obesity 90% Sloping forehead 90% Thick lower lip vermilion 90% Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 50% Downturned corners of mouth 50% Full cheeks 50% Hyperreflexia 50% Hypertonia 50% Muscular hypotonia 50% Nystagmus 50% Reduced number of teeth 50% Seizures 50% Talipes 50% Tapered finger 50% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.