Topic: Johnson Munson syndrome

Q: What are the symptoms of Johnson Munson syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Johnson Munson syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Johnson Munson syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Adactyly 90% Split foot 90% Vertebral segmentation defect 90% Abnormality of female external genitalia 50% Abnormality of pelvic girdle bone morphology 50% Abnormality of the metacarpal bones 50% Anonychia 50% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the lungs 50% Asymmetry of the thorax 50% Elbow dislocation 50% Finger syndactyly 50% Oligohydramnios 50% Patent ductus arteriosus 50% Renal hypoplasia/aplasia 50% Toe syndactyly 50% Vaginal fistula 50% Aphalangy of hands and feet - Aphalangy of the hands - Aplasia of the phalanges of the toes - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Hemivertebrae - Pulmonary hypoplasia - Ventricular septal defect - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.