Topic: Jones syndrome

Q: What is (are) Jones syndrome ?
A: Jones syndrome is a very rare condition characterized by gingival fibromatosis (enlargement and overgrowth of the gums) and progressive, sensorineural hearing loss. The onset of gingival fibromatosis usually occurs with the eruption of the permanent teeth. Excessive growth of the gums may cause displacement of teeth, over-retention of primary teeth, and increased spacing. Jones syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, but the underlying genetic cause is not yet known. Only a few families with Jones syndrome have been reported.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Jones syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Jones syndrome? Jones syndrome is primarily characterized by gingival fibromatosis (slowly progressive enlargement of the gums) and progressive, sensorineural hearing loss. Enlargement of the gingival tissue usually begins at the time the permanent teeth are erupting, although it may occur before. Excessive growth of the gums may cause displacement of teeth, over-retention of primary teeth, increased spacing, speech problems, and painful chewing. Absence of teeth (oligodontia) and extra (supernumerary) teeth have also been reported in people with Jones syndrome. Hearing loss has been reported to begin in the second or third decade of life and is bilateral (in both ears). Overlapping of symptoms with other syndromes associated with hereditary gingival fibromatosis (HGF) has been reported, including Zimmermann-Laband syndrome and gingival fibromatosis-hypertrichosis syndrome (HGF with excessive hair growth). It has been proposed that the overlapping features reported may represent a spectrum of a single disorder, rather than separate syndromes. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Jones syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Delayed eruption of teeth 90% Gingival overgrowth 90% Sensorineural hearing impairment 90% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Gingival fibromatosis - Progressive sensorineural hearing impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Jones syndrome ?
A: What causes Jones syndrome? The exact, underlying genetic cause of Jones syndrome is not yet known.

---

Q: Is Jones syndrome inherited ?
A: How is Jones syndrome inherited? Jones syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having only one changed (mutated) copy of the responsible gene in each cell is enough to cause signs or symptoms of the condition. When a person with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) risk to inherit the mutated copy of the gene from the affected parent.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Jones syndrome ?
A: How might Jones syndrome be treated? Due to the rarity of Jones syndrome, there are no treatment guidelines available in the medical literature. However, there is information about how the features associated with Jones syndrome might be treated. Treatment for gingival fibromatosis varies depending on the severity. Maintaining good oral hygiene is very important. Surgery to remove the enlarged gum tissue in the mouth (gingivectomy) may be needed for functional and/or cosmetic reasons. Enlargement may recur to various extents, and repeated surgeries may be needed to reshape the gums. It has been recommended that whenever possible, this treatment should be performed after the complete eruption of permanent teeth. The goal of treatment for sensorineural hearing loss is to improve hearing. People with sensorineural hearing loss may use hearing aids; telephone amplifiers and other assistive devices; sign language (for those with severe hearing loss); and/or speech reading (such as lip reading and using visual cues to aid communication). A cochlear implant may be recommended for some people with severe hearing loss.