Topic: Joubert syndrome 2

Q: What are the symptoms of Joubert syndrome 2 ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Joubert syndrome 2? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Joubert syndrome 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal renal physiology - Abnormality of saccadic eye movements - Abnormality of the corpus callosum - Abnormality of the foot - Agenesis of cerebellar vermis - Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Brainstem dysplasia - Central apnea - Chorioretinal coloboma - Depressed nasal bridge - Dolichocephaly - Dysgenesis of the cerebellar vermis - Elongated superior cerebellar peduncle - Encephalocele - Enlarged fossa interpeduncularis - Episodic tachypnea - Esotropia - Failure to thrive - Frontal bossing - Heterogeneous - High palate - Hydrocephalus - Hypertelorism - Hypoplasia of the brainstem - Hypoplastic male external genitalia - Impaired smooth pursuit - Intellectual disability - Low-set ears - Macrocephaly - Microphthalmia - Molar tooth sign on MRI - Muscular hypotonia - Neonatal breathing dysregulation - Nephronophthisis - Nystagmus - Oculomotor apraxia - Optic nerve coloboma - Phenotypic variability - Postaxial hand polydactyly - Renal cyst - Retinal dystrophy - Thickened superior cerebellar peduncle - Visual impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.