Topic: Konigsmark Knox Hussels syndrome

Q: What is (are) Konigsmark Knox Hussels syndrome ?
A: Konigsmark Knox Hussels syndrome is an inherited condition that causes both hearing and vision loss. This condition is characterized by late-onset progressive sensorineural deafness and progressive optic atrophy, which results in mildly reduced visual acuity. Some affected individuals can develop ophthalmoplegia (paralysis of the muscles that control eye movements), ptosis, ataxia, and non-specific myopathy in middle age. This condition is caused by a particular mutation in the OPA1 gene and is inerited in an autosomal dominant fashion.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Konigsmark Knox Hussels syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Konigsmark Knox Hussels syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Konigsmark Knox Hussels syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ataxia 5% Abnormal amplitude of pattern reversal visual evoked potentials - Abnormal auditory evoked potentials - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Central scotoma - Centrocecal scotoma - Horizontal nystagmus - Increased variability in muscle fiber diameter - Myopathy - Ophthalmoplegia - Optic atrophy - Peripheral neuropathy - Phenotypic variability - Progressive sensorineural hearing impairment - Ptosis - Red-green dyschromatopsia - Reduced visual acuity - Strabismus - Tritanomaly - Visual impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Konigsmark Knox Hussels syndrome ?
A: What causes Konigsmark Knox Hussels syndrome? Konigsmark Knox Hussels syndrome is caused by a particular mutation in the OPA1 gene. In most cases, this condition is caused by a mutation that replaces the amino acid arginine with the amino acid histidine at position 445 in the OPA1 protein. This is written as Arg445His or R445H. It is unclear why the R445H mutation causes both hearing and vision loss in affected individuals.

---

Q: How to diagnose Konigsmark Knox Hussels syndrome ?
A: Is genetic testing available for Konigsmark Knox Hussels syndrome? GeneTests lists the names of laboratories that are performing genetic testing for Konigsmark Knox Hussels syndrome. To view the contact information for the clinical laboratories conducting testing click here. Please note:  Most of the laboratories listed through GeneTests do not accept direct contact from patients and their families; therefore, if you are interested in learning more, you will need to work with a health care provider or a genetics professional.  Below, we provide a list of online resources that can assist you in locating a genetics professional near you.