Topic: Kyrle disease

Q: What is (are) Kyrle disease ?
A: Kyrle disease is a skin disease characterized by the formation of large papules and is often associated with underlying hepatic, renal or diabetic disorders. It can affect both men and women throughout life, although the average age of onset is 30 years. Lesions typically begin as small papules with silvery scales that eventually grow and form red-brown nodules with a central keratin (horny) plug. The lesions occur mostly on the legs but also develop on the arms and the head and neck region. They are not typically painful may cause intense itching (pruritus). The cause of the disease is unknown; some cases appear to be idiopathic (no known cause) or inherited. The aim of treatment is to treat the underlying disease if one is associated. Lesions may self-heal without any treatment, but new lesions usually develop. Treatments that have been used to treat and reduce lesions include isotretinoin, high dose vitamin A, and tretinoin cream; emollients (skin softening agents) and oral antihistamines may be useful in relieving pruritus.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Kyrle disease ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Kyrle disease? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Kyrle disease. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the skin - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Posterior subcapsular cataract - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Kyrle disease ?
A: What causes Kyrle disease? The cause of Kyrle disease is currently unknown. Some cases appear to be idiopathic (no known triggers), or inherited. What has been found is that Kyrle disease appears to occur more frequently in patients with certain systemic disorders, which include diabetes mellitus; renal disease (chronic renal failure, albuminuria, elevated serum creatinine, abnormal creatinine clearance, polyuria); hepatic abnormalities (alcoholic cirrhosis); and congestive heart failure. It has been thought that metabolic disorders associated with Kyrle disease are somehow responsible for development of abnormal keratinization and connective tissue changes, but the exact mechanism by which this happens is unclear.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Kyrle disease ?
A: How might Kyrle disease be treated? Kyrle disease is most often associated with a systemic disorder, although idiopathic cases without any associated disease have occurred. Therefore, treatment is typically directed toward the underlying condition when appropriate. For individuals in whom itching is a major problem, soothing antipruritic lotions containing menthol and camphor may be helpful. Sedating antihistamines such as hydroxyzine may also be helpful for pruritus, especially at night. Some improvement has been reported with high doses of vitamin A, with or without vitamin E. Topical retinoic acid cream may also improve the symptoms. Another approach to treatment uses oral retinoids, which resulted in alleviation of symptoms in one study. Etretinate in high doses is also reportedly effective, but relapse has been reported following discontinuation of therapy. UV light therapy is reportedly particularly helpful for individuals with widespread lesions or coexisting pruritus from renal or hepatic disease. Carbon dioxide laser or cryosurgery may be helpful for limited lesions, but caution may be recommended for individuals with dark skin, especially with cryosurgery, and for lesions on the lower legs, particularly in patients with diabetes mellitus or poor circulation.