Topic: L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase deficiency

Q: What is (are) L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase deficiency ?
A: L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT) deficiency is a rare condition that primarily affects the brain. People with AGAT deficiency generally have mild to moderate intellectual disability. Other signs and symptoms may include seizures, delayed language development, muscle weakness, failure to thrive, autistic behaviors, and delayed motor milestones (i.e. walking, sitting). AGAT deficiency is caused by changes (mutations) in the GATM gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment of AGAT deficiency is focused on increasing cerebral creatine levels and generally consists of supplementation with creatine monohydrate.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase deficiency ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase deficiency? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Gowers sign 5% Abnormality of creatine metabolism - Autism - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Delayed speech and language development - Failure to thrive - Infantile onset - Intellectual disability - Organic aciduria - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.