Topic: Leukonychia totalis

Q: What is (are) Leukonychia totalis ?
A: Leukonychia totalis is a nail condition characterized by complete whitening of the entire nail plate. It is usually inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Less commonly, it may be inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, or acquired (not inherited) during a person's lifetime. The inherited forms can be caused by mutations in the PLCD1 gene and generally involve the entire plate of all 20 nails. In some cases, leukonychia totalis has been associated with various other abnormalities or syndromes. Treatment may focus on the underlying cause when it is associated with another condition.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Leukonychia totalis ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Leukonychia totalis? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Leukonychia totalis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the fingernails 90% Abnormality of the toenails 90% Adenoma sebaceum 90% Nephrolithiasis 90% Blepharitis 50% Photophobia 50% Type II diabetes mellitus 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Concave nail - Leukonychia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Leukonychia totalis ?
A: What causes leukonychia totalis? Leukonychia totalis (also called total leukonychia) is thought to be due to abnormal keratinization (conversion into keratin) of the nail plate. Keratin is a protein that is a major component of the epidermis (outer layer of skin), hair, nails, and horny tissues. The condition is usually inherited, following either an autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. These inherited forms can be caused by mutations in the PLCD1 gene. In some cases, leukonychia occurs in association with other underlying abnormalities or syndromes. Conditions that have been reported include palmoplantar keratoderma; certain types of cysts; severe keratosis pilaris; pili torti; hypotrichosis (lack of hair growth); onychorrhexis (brittle nails); koilonychia (spoon-shaped nails); Bart-Pumphrey syndrome; and Buschkell-Gorlin syndrome, when it occurs with sebaceous cysts and kidney stones. It has also reportedly been associated with typhoid fever, leprosy, cirrhosis, nail biting, trichinosis, and cytotoxic drugs (drugs that are toxic to cells). In a few cases, the cause of leukonychia is unknown (idiopathic).

---

Q: Is Leukonychia totalis inherited ?
A: Is leukonychia totalis inherited? Leukonychia totalis can be inherited in either an autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive manner. It may also occur as part of various underlying conditions or abnormalities, some of which have their own specific genetic cause(s) and inheritance patterns. In some cases, the condition is idiopathic (of unknown cause). Autosomal dominant inheritance means that having a change (mutation) in only one copy of the disease-causing gene is enough to cause signs or symptoms. When a person with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) risk to inherit the mutated copy of the gene. Autsomal recessive inheritance means that a person must have mutations in both copies of the disease-causing gene to have the condition. Usually, one mutated copy is inherited from each parent, who are each referred to as a carrier.  Carriers of an autosomal recessive condition typically do not have any signs or symptoms.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Leukonychia totalis ?
A: How might leukonychia totalis be treated? There is no universally successful treatment for the whitening of the nails in people with leukonychia totalis. However, if the condition is known to have an underlying cause, treating that cause (when possible) may improve the condition.