Topic: Lichen sclerosus

Q: What is (are) Lichen sclerosus ?
A: Lichen sclerosus is a chronic skin disorder that is more common in women, most often affecting the external part of the vagina (vulva) or the area around the anus. In men, it typically affects the tip of the penis. It can occur at any age but is usually seen in women over age 50. Some people have no symptoms, while others may experience itchiness (sometimes severe), discomfort, or blistering. It often lasts for years and can cause permanent scarring. The underlying cause of lichen sclerosus is not fully understood but it is thought to relate to an autoimmune process. Treatment may include topical steroids or other types of topical creams and/or surgery.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Lichen sclerosus ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Lichen sclerosus? The symptoms are the same in children and adults. Early in the disease, small, subtle white spots appear. These areas are usually slightly shiny and smooth. As time goes on, the spots develop into bigger patches, and the skin surface becomes thinned and crinkled. As a result, the skin tears easily, and bright red or purple discoloration from bleeding inside the skin is common.  Symptoms vary depending on the area affected. Patients experience different degrees of discomfort. When lichen sclerosus occurs on parts of the body other than the genital area, most often there are no symptoms, other than itching. If the disease is severe, bleeding, tearing, and blistering caused by rubbing or bumping the skin can cause pain. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Lichen sclerosus. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal renal physiology 90% Abnormality of reproductive system physiology 90% Abnormality of the gastrointestinal tract 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the skin 90% Constipation 90% Hyperkeratosis 90% Lichenification 90% Pruritus 90% Autoimmunity 7.5% Psoriasis 7.5% Vaginal neoplasm 7.5% Verrucae 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Squamous cell carcinoma - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Lichen sclerosus ?
A: What causes lichen sclerosus? The underlying cause of lichen sclerosus is not fully understood. The condition may be due to genetic, hormonal, irritant and/or infectious factors (or a combination of these factors). It is believed to relate to an autoimmune process, in which antibodies mistakenly attack a component of the skin. Other autoimmune conditions are reported to occur more frequently than expected in people with lichen sclerosis. In some cases, lichen sclerosus appears on skin that has been damaged or scarred from previous injury or trauma.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Lichen sclerosus ?
A: How might lichen sclerosus be treated? Strong topical steroid creams or ointments reportedly are very helpful for lichen sclerosus, especially when it affects the genital areas. However, the response to this treatment varies. While itching may be relieved within days, it can take weeks or months for the skin's appearance to return to normal. Other treatments that may be used instead of steroid creams, or in combination with steroid creams, include calcipotriol cream, topical and systemic retinoids (acitretin), and/or systemic steroids. If the vaginal opening has narrowed, dilators may be needed. In rare cases, surgery is necessary to allow for sexual intercourse. The condition sometimes causes the vaginal opening to narrow or close again after surgery is initially successful. Additional information about treatment of lichen sclerosus can be viewed on Medscape's Web site.