Topic: Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2H

Q: What are the symptoms of Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2H ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2H? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2H. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) EMG abnormality 90% Gait disturbance 90% Mask-like facies 90% Myopathy 90% Tall stature 50% Areflexia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Calf muscle pseudohypertrophy - Centrally nucleated skeletal muscle fibers - Elevated serum creatine phosphokinase - EMG: myopathic abnormalities - Exercise-induced myalgia - Facial palsy - Gowers sign - Hyporeflexia - Increased variability in muscle fiber diameter - Muscular dystrophy - Neck flexor weakness - Pelvic girdle muscle atrophy - Pelvic girdle muscle weakness - Phenotypic variability - Quadriceps muscle weakness - Shoulder girdle muscle atrophy - Shoulder girdle muscle weakness - Slow progression - Waddling gait - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.