Topic: Lipoic acid synthetase deficiency

Q: What is (are) Lipoic acid synthetase deficiency ?
A: Lipoic acid synthetase deficiency is a rare condition that affects the mitochondria. Mitochondria are tiny structures found in almost every cell of the body. They are responsible for creating most of the energy necessary to sustain life and support growth. People affected by this condition generally experience early-onset lactic acidosis, severe encephalopathy, seizures, poor growth, hypotonia, and developmental delay. It is caused by changes (mutations) in the LIAS gene and it is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Lipoic acid synthetase deficiency ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Lipoic acid synthetase deficiency? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Lipoic acid synthetase deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Apnea - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Encephalopathy - Feeding difficulties - Flexion contracture - Growth delay - Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy - Increased serum lactate - Lactic acidosis - Microcephaly - Motor delay - Muscular hypotonia - Respiratory insufficiency - Seizures - Severe global developmental delay - Sleep disturbance - Spastic tetraplegia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.