Topic: Michels syndrome

Q: What is (are) Michels syndrome ?
A: Michels syndrome is an extremely rare disorder characterized by the eyelid triad of blepharophimosis (a narrowing of the eye opening), blepharoptosis and epicanthus inversus (an upward fold of the skin of the lower eyelid near the inner corner of the eye), skeletal defects including craniosynostosis, cranial asymmetry, abnormality of the occipital bone (at the base of the skull), and radioulnar synostosis, cleft lip and palate, and mental deficiency. Only 10 cases have been reported in the medical literature. While the underlying cause of this condition remains unknown, it is believed to be transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait.  Based on phenotypic overlap and autosomal recessive inheritance, some researchers have suggested that Michels, Malpuech, Carnevale and Mingarelli syndromes represent a spectrum and should be referred to a 3MC syndrome (for Malpuech-Michels-Mingarelli-Carnevale).

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Michels syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Michels syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Michels syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of eye movement - Abnormality of the anterior chamber - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Blepharophimosis - Broad foot - Cleft palate - Cleft upper lip - Clinodactyly of the 5th finger - Conductive hearing impairment - Conjunctival telangiectasia - Coronal craniosynostosis - Dental crowding - Epicanthus inversus - Glaucoma - Growth delay - Highly arched eyebrow - Hydronephrosis - Hypertelorism - Intellectual disability, mild - Lambdoidal craniosynostosis - Microcephaly - Omphalocele - Postnatal growth retardation - Ptosis - Radioulnar synostosis - Sacral dimple - Short 5th finger - Short foot - Single interphalangeal crease of fifth finger - Skull asymmetry - Spina bifida occulta - Supernumerary nipple - Underdeveloped supraorbital ridges - Wide anterior fontanel - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.