Topic: Michelin tire baby syndrome

Q: What is (are) Michelin tire baby syndrome ?
A: Michelin tire baby syndrome (MTBS) is a rare skin condition that consists of many, symmetrical skin folds found on the arms and legs of an affected individual at birth (congenital).  The skin folds do not cause any problems or impairments and usually disappear naturally as the child grows.  MTBS may be associated with other signs, such as unusual facial features or delays in development; these other features are different for each affected individual.  The exact cause of MTBS is unknown.  It has been suggested that MTBS might have a genetic cause, because there are reports of multiple affected members of the same family.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Michelin tire baby syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Michelin tire baby syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Michelin tire baby syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cutis laxa 90% Edema 90% Sacrococcygeal pilonidal abnormality 90% Thickened skin 90% Cleft palate 50% Irregular hyperpigmentation 50% Abnormality of the musculature 7.5% Abnormality of the scrotum 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia affecting the eye 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Congestive heart failure 7.5% Cryptorchidism 7.5% Displacement of the external urethral meatus 7.5% Epicanthus 7.5% External ear malformation 7.5% Hypertrichosis 7.5% Long philtrum 7.5% Lower limb asymmetry 7.5% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 7.5% Microcephaly 7.5% Microcornea 7.5% Neoplasm of the nervous system 7.5% Retinopathy 7.5% Short stature 7.5% Umbilical hernia 7.5% Abnormality of cardiovascular system morphology - Abnormality of the skin - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Localized neuroblastoma - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.