Topic: Mnire's disease

Q: What is (are) Mnire's disease ?
A: Mnire's disease is an abnormality of the inner ear. Signs and symptoms may include disabling vertigo or severe dizziness lasting from minutes to hours; tinnitus or a roaring sound in the ears; fluctuating hearing loss; and the sensation of pressure or pain in the affected ear. A small percentage of people have drop attacks, also called spells of Tumarkin. The disorder usually affects only one ear and is a common cause of hearing loss. Some people develop symptoms in both ears many years after their initial diagnosis. The exact cause of Mnire's disease is unknown, but the symptoms are thought to be associated with a change in fluid volume within a portion of the inner ear known as the labyrinth. Treatment may include medications or surgery depending on the severity of the condition.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Mnire's disease ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Mnire's disease? The symptoms of Mnire's disease typically occur suddenly and can arise daily, or as infrequently as once a year. Vertigo, often the most debilitating symptom of Mnire's disease, typically involves a whirling dizziness that forces the affected person to lie down. Vertigo attacks can lead to severe nausea, vomiting, and sweating, and often come with little or no warning. Some people with Mnire's disease have attacks that start with tinnitus (ear noises), a loss of hearing, or a full feeling or pressure in the affected ear. It is important to remember that all of these symptoms are unpredictable. Typically, the attack is characterized by a combination of vertigo, tinnitus, and hearing loss lasting several hours. People experience these discomforts at varying frequencies, durations, and intensities. Some may feel slight vertigo a few times a year. Others may be occasionally disturbed by intense, uncontrollable tinnitus while sleeping. Affected people may also notice hearing loss or feel unsteady for prolonged periods. Other occasional symptoms of Mnire's disease may include headaches, abdominal discomfort, and diarrhea. A person's hearing tends to recover between attacks but over time may become worse. Meniere's disease usually starts in one ear but it may extend to involve both ears over time. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Mnire's disease. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Hearing impairment - Tinnitus - Vertigo - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Mnire's disease ?
A: What causes Mnire's disease? The underlying cause of Mnire's disease is unknown, although it probably results from a combination of environmental and genetic factors. Possible factors that have been studied include viral infections; trauma to the middle ear; middle ear infection (otitis media); head injury; a hereditary predisposition; syphilis; allergies; abnormal immune system responses; migraines; and noise pollution. The symptoms of Mnire's disease are thought to relate to changes in fluid volume in the inner ear, which contains structures necessary for normal hearing and balance. Changes in fluid volume may disrupt signals sent from the inner ear to the brain, or may lead to tears or ruptures of the structures that affect hearing and balance. More detailed information about the causes of symptoms associated with Mnire's disease is available on NIDCD's Web site.

---

Q: How to diagnose Mnire's disease ?
A: How is Mnire's disease diagnosed? The hallmark of Mnire's disease is the fluctuation, waxing and waning of symptoms.  Proper diagnosis of Mnire's disease entails several procedures, including a medical history interview; a physical examination; hearing and balance tests; and medical imaging with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Accurate measurement and characterization of hearing loss are of critical importance in the diagnosis of Mnire's disease. Through the use of several types of hearing tests, physicians can characterize hearing loss as being sensory (arising from the inner ear) or neural (arising from the hearing nerve). Recording the auditory brain stem response, which measures electrical activity in the hearing nerve and brain stem, is useful in differentiating between these two types of hearing loss. Electrocochleography, recording the electrical activity of the inner ear in response to sound, helps confirm the diagnosis. To test the vestibular or balance system, physicians irrigate the ears with warm and cool water or air. This procedure, known as caloric testing, results in nystagmus, rapid eye movements that can help a physician analyze a balance disorder. Since tumor growth can produce symptoms similar to Mnire's disease, an MRI is a useful test to determine whether a tumor is causing the patient's vertigo and hearing loss.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Mnire's disease ?
A: How might Mnire's disease be treated? At the present time there is no cure for Mnire's disease, but there are several safe and effective medical and surgical therapies that are available to help individuals cope with the symptoms. The symptoms of the disease are often controlled successfully by reducing the bodys retention of fluids through dietary changes (such as a low-salt or salt-free diet and no caffeine or alcohol). Medications such as antihistamines, anticholinergics, and diuretics may lower endolymphatic pressure by reducing the amount of endolymphatic fluid. Eliminating tobacco use and reducing stress levels may also help lessen the severity of symptoms. Symptoms such as dizziness, vertigo, and associated nausea and vomiting may respond to sedative/hypnotics, benzodiazepines like diazepam and anti-emetics. Different surgical procedures are an option for individuals with persistent, debilitating vertigo. Labyrinthectomy (removal of the inner ear sense organ) can effectively control vertigo, but sacrifices hearing and is reserved for patients with nonfunctional hearing in the affected ear. Vestibular neurectomy, selectively severing a nerve from the affected inner ear organ, usually controls the vertigo while preserving hearing but carries surgical risks. Recently, the administration of the ototoxic antibiotic gentamycin directly into the middle ear space has gained popularity worldwide for the control of vertigo associated with Mnire's disease. An article published in the journal Lancet in August 2008, written by Sajjadi and Paparella, reviews treatment options and strategies for individuals with Mnire's disease. Click here to view the abstract of this article. To obtain the complete article, the NLM Web site has a page for locating libraries in your area that can provide direct access to journals (print or online) or where you can get articles through interlibrary loan and Loansome Doc (an NLM document-ordering service). Click on NLM Web site to access this page or go to the following link: http://nnlm.gov/members/. You can also contact the NLM toll-free at 888-346-3656 to locate libraries in your area.