Topic: Multifocal choroiditis

Q: What is (are) Multifocal choroiditis ?
A: Multifocal choroiditis (MFC) is an inflammatory disorder characterized by swelling of the eye (called uveitis) and multiple lesions in the choroid, a layer of blood vessels between the white of the eye and the retina. Symptoms include blurry vision, floaters, sensitivity to light, blind spots and mild eye discomfort. Though the cause is unknown, multifocal choroiditis is seen most frequently in women ages 20 to 60, and usually affects both eyes. MFC is generally treated with steroid medication that can be taken orally or injected into the eye. Multifocal choroiditis is a chronic condition, thus symptoms may return or worsen even after successful treatment.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Multifocal choroiditis ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of multifocal choroiditis? Multifocal choroiditis (MFC) generally causes blurry vision with or without sensitivity to light. Other common symptoms include blind spots, floaters, eye discomfort and perceived flashes of light. Clinical examination by an ophthalmologist reveals inflammation in the front, middle and/or back layers of the eye with multiple scattered yellow/gray-white spots in the choroid and retina. A subset of people with this condition also develop choroidal neovascular membranes (CNVMs), new blood vessels that can cause more severe vision loss.

---

Q: What causes Multifocal choroiditis ?
A: What causes multifocal choroiditis? Multifocal choroiditis occurs spontaneously and the cause is not currently known (idiopathic). It is possible that a bacterial or viral infection may trigger an immune response that causes the inflammation seen with MFC, though more research is needed in this area.

---

Q: How to diagnose Multifocal choroiditis ?
A: How is multifocal choroiditis diagnosed? Multifocal choroiditis (MFC) is diagnosed by an ophthalmologist, using a series of imaging techniques. A test called flourescein angiography uses a special dye and camera to study blood flow in the back layers of the eye. When a person has MFC, lesions in the eye will appear as fluorescent spots. Vision tests may also show an enlarged blind spot or a decrease in visual clarity. Often, doctors may order blood tests to check if the symptoms are caused by a viral disease rather than MFC.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Multifocal choroiditis ?
A: How might multifocal choroiditis be treated? Multifocal choroiditis (MFC) is generally treated with steroid medication that can be taken orally or injected into the affected eye. These treatments may be successful in managing symptoms, though there is no permanent cure for the disease and symptoms may return. If a person no longer responds to steroid treatment, drugs that suppress the immune system, such as cyclosporine, may be recommended. People with more severe vision loss may also benefit from laser therapy. Frequent monitoring by an ophthalmologist is recommended to determine how well treatment is working.