Topic: Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A

Q: What is (are) Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A ?
A: Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A) is is an inherited disorder caused by mutations in the RET gene. Individuals with MEN 2A are at high risk of developing medullary carcinoma of the thyroid. About 50% will develop pheochromocytoma, a tumor of the adrenal glands which may increase blood pressure. Individuals with MEN 2A are also at increased risk for parathyroid adenoma or hyperplasia (overgrowth of the parathyroid gland). Occasionally an itchy skin condition called cutaneous lichen amyloidosis also occurs in people with type 2A disease. The condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the integument - Aganglionic megacolon - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Elevated calcitonin - Elevated urinary epinephrine - Hypercortisolism - Hyperparathyroidism - Hypertension - Medullary thyroid carcinoma - Parathyroid adenoma - Pheochromocytoma - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: Is Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A inherited ?
A: How is multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A inherited? Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A) is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. A person with MEN 2A often inherits the altered RET gene from one parent with the condition.