Topic: Multicentric osteolysis nephropathy

Q: What are the symptoms of Multicentric osteolysis nephropathy ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Multicentric osteolysis nephropathy? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Multicentric osteolysis nephropathy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the metacarpal bones 90% Decreased body weight 90% EMG abnormality 90% Gait disturbance 90% Limitation of joint mobility 90% Proptosis 90% Proteinuria 90% Skeletal muscle atrophy 90% Slender long bone 90% Triangular face 90% Camptodactyly of finger 50% Nephropathy 50% Abnormality of epiphysis morphology 7.5% Downturned corners of mouth 7.5% Polyhydramnios 7.5% Telecanthus 7.5% Wide nasal bridge 7.5% Ankle swelling - Arthralgia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Carpal osteolysis - Hypertension - Hypoplasia of the maxilla - Metacarpal osteolysis - Metatarsal osteolysis - Osteolysis involving tarsal bones - Osteopenia - Pes cavus - Renal insufficiency - Ulnar deviation of the hand or of fingers of the hand - Wrist swelling - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.