Topic: MYH-associated polyposis

Q: What is (are) MYH-associated polyposis ?
A: MYH-associated polyposis is an inherited condition characterized by the development of multiple adenomatous colon polyps and an increased risk of colorectal cancer. This condition, a milder form of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), is sometimes called autosomal recessive familial adenomatous polyposis because it is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. People with this condition have fewer polyps than those with the classic type of FAP; fewer than 100 polyps typically develop, rather than hundreds or thousands. They may also be at increased risk for upper gastrointestinal polyps. MYH-associated polyposis is caused by mutations in the MYH gene.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of MYH-associated polyposis ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of MYH-associated polyposis? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for MYH-associated polyposis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Colon cancer 5/12 Adenomatous colonic polyposis - Autosomal recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes MYH-associated polyposis ?
A: What causes MYH-associated polyposis? Mutations in the MYH gene cause MYH-associated polyposis. Mutations in this gene prevent cells from correcting mistakes that are made when DNA is copied (DNA replication) in preparation for cell division. As these mistakes build up in a person's DNA, the likelihood of cell overgrowth increases, leading to colon polyps and the possibility of colon cancer.