Topic: Myotonia congenita autosomal dominant

Q: What is (are) Myotonia congenita autosomal dominant ?
A: Myotonia congenita is a genetic condition characterized by the inability of the skeletal muscles to quickly relax after a voluntary movement.  The symptoms associated with the condition typically appear in childhood and vary from person to person. There are two forms of the disorder:  Becker type, which is the most common form; and Thomsen disease, which is a rare and milder form. Both conditions are caused by mutations in the CLCN1 gene.  However, the conditions have different modes of inheritance.  The Becker type is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion, and the Thomsen type is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Myotonia congenita autosomal dominant ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Myotonia congenita autosomal dominant? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Myotonia congenita autosomal dominant. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) EMG abnormality 90% Myotonia 90% Muscle weakness 75% Myalgia 5% Myotonia with warm-up phenomenon 27/27 Percussion myotonia 26/27 Muscle stiffness 25/27 Skeletal muscle hypertrophy 7/9 Myalgia 11/27 Autosomal dominant inheritance - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Childhood onset - Dysphagia - EMG: myotonic runs - Handgrip myotonia - Muscle hypertrophy of the lower extremities - Phenotypic variability - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.