Topic: Myxopapillary ependymoma

Q: What is (are) Myxopapillary ependymoma ?
A: Myxopapillary ependymoma (MEPN) is a slow-growing ependymoma (a type of glioma, which is a tumor that arises from the supportive tissue of the brain). They tend to occur in the lower part of the spinal column and are usually considered to be benign, low-grade or grade I tumors. The age of diagnosis ranges from 6 to 82 years. Symptoms of an ependymoma are related to the location and size of the tumor and may include nausea, vomiting, headache, pain, numbness, bowel or bladder symptoms, and various other signs and symptoms. The cause of ependymomas is unknown. They are known to recur locally (more commonly in individuals diagnosed in childhood). Treatment may vary depending on the location, grade, and whether the tumor has spread to the spine, but typically includes aggressive surgery. Management may also include chemotherapy and radiation therapy.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Myxopapillary ependymoma ?
A: How might myxopapillary ependymoma be treated? Standard treatment of myxopapillary ependymoma is surgery with the aim of removing as much of the tumor as possible. This tumor type may be cured if all of the tumor is removed during surgery, which is referred to as total resection, and there is usually a favorable outlook in these cases. However, surgery is typically less curative in tumors that are large, multifocal or extend outside the spinal cord. These tumors have the potential to regrow after the initial diagnosis and surgery (recur), particularly in individuals diagnosed as children. Following surgery, radiation therapy may be considered to destroy any cancer cells that could remain in the body.  The use of chemotherapy as another treatment of myxopapillary ependymoma remains controversial; chemotherapy has been widely used in pediatric individuals due to more aggressive disease. The usefulness of additional therapies following surgery is unclear for the subset of individuals with recurrence or in individuals in whom total resection cannot be achieved.