Topic: Neuropathy ataxia retinitis pigmentosa syndrome

Q: What is (are) Neuropathy ataxia retinitis pigmentosa syndrome ?
A: Neuropathy ataxia retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) syndrome is characterized by a variety of signs and symptoms that mainly affect the nervous system. Beginning in childhood or early adulthood, most people with NARP experience numbness, tingling, or pain in the arms and legs (sensory neuropathy); muscle weakness; and problems with balance and coordination (ataxia). Affected individuals may also have vision loss caused by a condition called retinitis pigmentosa. Other features of NARP include learning disabilities, developmental delay, seizures, dementia, hearing loss, and cardiac conduction defects. Mutations in the MT-ATP6 gene cause NARP syndrome. This gene is located within mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Most individuals with NARP have a specific MT-ATP6 mutation in 70 percent to 90 percent of their mitochondria. NARP syndrome is inherited from the mother (maternal inheritance) because only females pass mitochondrial DNA to their children.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Neuropathy ataxia retinitis pigmentosa syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Neuropathy ataxia retinitis pigmentosa syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Neuropathy ataxia retinitis pigmentosa syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ataxia - Blindness - Corticospinal tract atrophy - Dementia - Mitochondrial inheritance - Mitochondrial myopathy - Myopathy - Nystagmus - Proximal muscle weakness - Retinal pigment epithelial mottling - Rod-cone dystrophy - Seizures - Sensory neuropathy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.