Topic: Oculodentoosseous dysplasia recessive

Q: What are the symptoms of Oculodentoosseous dysplasia recessive ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Oculodentoosseous dysplasia recessive? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Oculodentoosseous dysplasia recessive. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) 2-4 toe cutaneous syndactyly - 4-5 finger syndactyly - Abnormality of dental enamel - Abnormality of dental morphology - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Brachycephaly - Broad long bones - Cataract - Delayed eruption of teeth - Delayed skeletal maturation - Dental crowding - Dental malocclusion - Failure to thrive - Fifth finger distal phalanx clinodactyly - Frontal bossing - Hypoplasia of teeth - Hypoplasia of the maxilla - Large earlobe - Long nose - Long philtrum - Low-set ears - Macrodontia of permanent maxillary central incisor - Microcornea - Microphthalmia - Myopia - Narrow mouth - Narrow nose - Persistent pupillary membrane - Prominent epicanthal folds - Short foot - Short palpebral fissure - Short stature - Small hand - Sparse eyelashes - Telecanthus - Thin vermilion border - Underdeveloped nasal alae - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.