Topic: Orofaciodigital syndrome 2

Q: What is (are) Orofaciodigital syndrome 2 ?
A: Orofaciodigital syndrome (OFDS) type 2 is a genetic condition that was first described in 1941 by Mohr. OFDS type 2 belongs to a group of disorders called orofaciodigital syndromes (OFDS) characterized by mouth malformations, unique facial findings, and abnormalities of the fingers and/or toes. Other organs might be affected in OFDS, defining the specific types. OFDS type 2 is very similar to oral-facial-digital syndrome (OFDS) type 1. However, the following are not found in OFDS type 1: (1) absence of hair and skin abnormalities; (2) presence of more than one fused big toe on each foot; (3) involvement of the central nervous system; and (4) heart malformations. Although it is known that OFDS type 2 is genetic, the exact gene that causes the syndrome has not been identified. The condition is believed to be inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Treatment is based on the symptoms present in the patient.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Orofaciodigital syndrome 2 ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Orofaciodigital syndrome 2? Although the signs and symptoms that occur in people with orofaciodigital syndrome type 2 may vary, the following findings may be present:Facial findings Nodules (bumps) of the tongue Cleft lip Thick frenula (a strong cord of tissue that is visible and easily felt if you look in the mirror under your tongue and under your lips) Dystopia canthorum (an unusually wide nasal bridge resulting in widely spaced eyes) Finger and toe findings Clinobrachydactyly (narrow, short fingers and toes) Syndactyly (fused fingers and toes) Polydactyly (presence of more than five fingers on hands and/or five toes on feet) Y-shaped central metacarpal (bone that connects the fingers to the hands) Other possible findings Conductive hearing loss Central nervous system impairments (porencephaly and hydrocephaly) Heart defects (atrioventricular canal [endocardial cushion] defects) The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Orofaciodigital syndrome 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Bifid tongue 90% Brachydactyly syndrome 90% Conductive hearing impairment 90% Finger syndactyly 90% Postaxial hand polydactyly 90% Short stature 90% Telecanthus 90% Wide nasal bridge 90% Clinodactyly of the 5th finger 75% Preaxial foot polydactyly 75% Abnormality of the metaphyses 50% Accessory oral frenulum 50% Bifid nasal tip 50% Broad nasal tip 50% Depressed nasal bridge 50% Flared metaphysis 50% Hypoplasia of the maxilla 50% Lobulated tongue 50% Malar flattening 50% Median cleft lip 50% Metaphyseal irregularity 50% Midline defect of the nose 50% Reduced number of teeth 50% Tongue nodules 50% Postaxial foot polydactyly 33% Preaxial hand polydactyly 33% Abnormality of the cranial nerves 7.5% Abnormality of the genital system 7.5% Abnormality of the metacarpal bones 7.5% Agenesis of central incisor 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the cerebellum 7.5% Cleft palate 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% High palate 7.5% Hydrocephalus 7.5% Laryngomalacia 7.5% Pectus excavatum 7.5% Porencephaly 7.5% Scoliosis 7.5% Seizures 7.5% Syndactyly 7.5% Tracheal stenosis 7.5% Wormian bones 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Bilateral postaxial polydactyly - Hypertelorism - Partial duplication of the phalanges of the hallux - Short palm - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Orofaciodigital syndrome 2 ?
A: What causes orofaciodigital syndrome type 2? Orofaciodigital syndrome type 2 is caused by mutations (changes) of an as yet unidentified gene.

---

Q: Is Orofaciodigital syndrome 2 inherited ?
A: How is orofaciodigital syndrome type 2 inherited? Orofaciodigital syndrome type 2 is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means that an individual needs to inherit two mutated (changed) copies of the gene-one from each parent-in order to have the condition.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Orofaciodigital syndrome 2 ?
A: What treatment is available for orofaciodigital syndrome type 2? Treatment is dependent on the symptoms. For example, reconstructive surgery might be performed to correct oral, facial, and/or finger and toe abnormalities.