Topic: Osteogenesis imperfecta type VI

Q: What is (are) Osteogenesis imperfecta type VI ?
A: Osteogenesis imperfecta type 6 is a form of osteogenesis imperfecta which results in weakened bones that breaks easily.  When viewed under a microscope, bone tissue has a distinct "fish-scale" pattern.  Individuals with osteogenesis imperfecta type 6 appear to be healthy at birth and do not have fractures until after 6 months of age. Osteogenesis imperfecta type 6 may be caused by mutations in the SERPINF1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Osteogenesis imperfecta type VI ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Osteogenesis imperfecta type VI? Osteogenesis imperfecta type VI is a moderate to severe form of osteogenesis imperfecta that affects the bones but is distinctive in the bone characteristics at a microscopic level (histology).  People with this condition have bones that are thin (osteopenia) and break easily beginning  after 6 months of age.  A defect in how the bone uses minerals to build and strengthen bone (mineralization) causes a distinct "fish-scale" pattern.  Unlike other types of osteogenesis imperfecta, the whites of the eyes (sclerae) and teeth do not appear to be affected. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Osteogenesis imperfecta type VI. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Beaking of vertebral bodies - Biconcave vertebral bodies - Coxa vara - Increased susceptibility to fractures - Ligamentous laxity - Protrusio acetabuli - Vertebral compression fractures - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: Is Osteogenesis imperfecta type VI inherited ?
A: How is osteogenesis imperfecta type 6 inherited? Osteogenesis imperfecta type 6 has an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Autosomal recessive inheritance means that two copies of the gene in each cell are altered. The parents of a child with an autosomal recessive disorder typically are not affected, but each carry one copy of the altered gene (they are referred to as carriers). When two carriers for an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier. The children of an individual with an autosomal recessive type of OI are always carriers for a disease-causing mutation.

---

Q: How to diagnose Osteogenesis imperfecta type VI ?
A: Is genetic testing available for osteogenesis imperfecta? Genetic testing is available for individuals with osteogenesis imperfecta. The rate for detecting mutations in the genes that are responsible for OI varies depending on the type. Carrier testing may be available to relatives of affected individuals if the type of OI, disease-causing gene, and specific mutation in the affected individual are known. Prenatal testing for at-risk pregnancies can be performed by analysis of collagen made by fetal cells obtained by chorionic villus sampling (CVS) at about ten to 12 weeks' gestation if an abnormality of collagen has been identified in cells from the affected individual. Analysis of collagen after an amniocentesis (usually performed at 15-20 weeks gestation) is not useful, because the cells obtained do not produce type I collagen. However, prenatal testing can be performed by analyzing the genes (molecular genetic testing) if the specific mutation has been identified in the affected relative. GeneTests lists the names of laboratories that are performing genetic testing for different types of osteogenesis imperfecta. To view the contact information for the clinical laboratories conducting testing, click here and click on "Testing" next to the type of OI in which you are interested. Please note that most of the laboratories listed through GeneTests do not accept direct contact from patients and their families; therefore, if you are interested in learning more, you will need to work with a health care provider or genetics professional. Genetics professionals, such as genetic counselors, can also explain the inheritance of OI in detail including information about genetic risks to specific family members.