Topic: Osteogenesis imperfecta type I

Q: What is (are) Osteogenesis imperfecta type I ?
A: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a group of genetic disorders that mainly affect the bones. Osteogenesis imperfecta type 1 is the mildest form of OI and is characterized by bone fractures during childhood and adolescence that often result from minor trauma. Fractures occur less frequently in adulthood. People with mild forms of the condition typically have a blue or grey tint to the part of the eye that is usually white (the sclera), and may develop hearing loss in adulthood. Affected individuals are usually of normal or near normal height. Most of the mutations that cause osteogenesis imperfecta type 1 occur in the COL1A1 gene. These genetic changes reduce the amount of type I collagen produced in the body, which causes bones to be brittle and to fracture easily. OI type 1 exhibits an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Osteogenesis imperfecta type I ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Osteogenesis imperfecta type I? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Osteogenesis imperfecta type I. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Dentinogenesis imperfecta 5% Aortic dilatation - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Biconcave flattened vertebrae - Blue sclerae - Bruising susceptibility - Femoral bowing - Growth abnormality - Hearing impairment - Increased susceptibility to fractures - Joint hypermobility - Mitral valve prolapse - Osteopenia - Otosclerosis - Recurrent fractures - Thin skin - Wormian bones - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.