Topic: Osteomesopyknosis

Q: What is (are) Osteomesopyknosis ?
A: Osteomesopyknosis is a bone disorder characterized by abnormal hardening of bone (osteosclerosis). It is generally limited to the axial spine, pelvis, and proximal part of the long bones, which is what distinguishes this condition from other sclerosing bone disorders. It is usually diagnosed incidentally in young adults complaining of back pain. Osteomesopyknosis is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner but the genetic cause has not yet been identified. It is generally benign and life expectancy is normal.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Osteomesopyknosis ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Osteomesopyknosis? Osteomesopyknosis may cause chronic, low-grade back pain in the thoracic (middle) and lumbar (lower) regions. It is considered a mild form of osteosclerosis and is usually found in young adults or teenagers. Height and intellect are not affected. Life expectancy in affected people is normal. There are cases of association with other findings such as ovarian sclerosis and lymphoma; however, it is uncertain whether they have been coincidental or features of the disorder. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Osteomesopyknosis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Increased bone mineral density 90% Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 50% Kyphosis 50% Scoliosis 50% Abnormal cortical bone morphology 7.5% Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Infertility - Low back pain - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: Is Osteomesopyknosis inherited ?
A: How is osteomesopyknosis inherited? Osteomesopyknosis is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having only one mutated copy of the responsible gene (which has not yet been identified) is enough to cause signs or symptoms of the disorder. When a person with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be affected. There have been reported cases where both parents of an affected person did not appear to have the condition. The chance of having signs and symptoms when the responsible mutation is present (penetrance), and potential nature of signs and symptoms (expressivity), is not clear.