Topic: Osteopetrosis autosomal recessive 3

Q: What is (are) Osteopetrosis autosomal recessive 3 ?
A: Osteopetrosis is a bone disease that makes bones abnormally dense and prone to breakage (fracture). Researchers have described several major types of osteopetrosis, which are usually distinguished by their pattern of inheritance: autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked. The different types of the disorder can also be distinguished by the severity of their signs and symptoms. Mutations in at least nine genes cause the various types of osteopetrosis.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Osteopetrosis autosomal recessive 3 ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Osteopetrosis autosomal recessive 3? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Osteopetrosis autosomal recessive 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of epiphysis morphology 90% Abnormality of the renal tubule 90% Anemia 90% Aseptic necrosis 90% Bone pain 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Genu valgum 90% Hepatomegaly 90% Increased bone mineral density 90% Recurrent fractures 90% Reduced bone mineral density 90% Splenomegaly 90% Abnormality of dental morphology 50% Carious teeth 50% Cerebral calcification 50% Mandibular prognathia 50% Peripheral neuropathy 50% Thrombocytopenia 50% Optic atrophy 7.5% Visual impairment 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Basal ganglia calcification - Cranial hyperostosis - Dental malocclusion - Diaphyseal sclerosis - Distal renal tubular acidosis - Elevated serum acid phosphatase - Extramedullary hematopoiesis - Hepatosplenomegaly - Intellectual disability - Optic nerve compression - Osteopetrosis - Periodic hypokalemic paresis - Short stature - Visual loss - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.