Topic: Osteogenesis imperfecta type VII

Q: What are the symptoms of Osteogenesis imperfecta type VII ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Osteogenesis imperfecta type VII? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Osteogenesis imperfecta type VII. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Absent pulmonary artery - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Blue sclerae - Bowing of the legs - Breech presentation - Coxa vara - Crumpled long bones - Death in infancy - Decreased calvarial ossification - Delayed cranial suture closure - Externally rotated/abducted legs - Hydronephrosis - Hypoplastic pulmonary veins - Long philtrum - Micromelia - Multiple prenatal fractures - Multiple rib fractures - Narrow chest - Osteopenia - Pectus excavatum - Proptosis - Protrusio acetabuli - Recurrent fractures - Rhizomelia - Round face - Scoliosis - Vertebral compression fractures - Wide anterior fontanel - Wide cranial sutures - Wormian bones - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.