Topic: Parasites - Hookworm

Q: What is (are) Parasites - Hookworm ?
A: Hookworm is an intestinal parasite of humans. The larvae and adult worms live in the small intestine can cause intestinal disease. The two main species of hookworm infecting humans are Ancylostoma duodenale and Necator americanus.

---

Q: Who is at risk for Parasites - Hookworm? ?
A: Hookworm is a soil-transmitted helminth (STH) and is one of the most common roundworm of humans. Infection is caused by the nematode parasites Necator americanus and Ancylostoma duodenale. Hookworm infections often occur in areas where human feces are used as fertilizer or where defecation onto soil happens.
    Geographic Distribution
    
The geographic distributions of the hookworm species that are intestinal parasites in human, Ancylostoma duodenale and Necator americanus, are worldwide in areas with warm, moist climates and are widely overlapping. Necator americanus was widespread in the Southeastern United States until the early 20th century.

---

Q: How to diagnose Parasites - Hookworm ?
A: The standard method for diagnosing the presence of hookworm is by identifying hookworm eggs in a stool sample using a microscope. Because eggs may be difficult to find in light infections, a concentration procedure is recommended.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Parasites - Hookworm ?
A: Anthelminthic medications (drugs that rid the body of parasitic worms), such as albendazole and mebendazole, are the drugs of choice for treatment of hookworm infections. Infections are generally treated for 1-3 days. The recommended medications are effective and appear to have few side effects. Iron supplements may also be prescribed if the infected person has anemia.
    
More on: Resources for Health Professionals: Treatment

---

Q: How to prevent Parasites - Hookworm ?
A: The best way to avoid hookworm infection is not to walk barefoot in areas where hookworm is common and where there may be human fecal contamination of the soil. Also, avoid other skin contact with such soil and avoid ingesting it.
    
Infection can also be prevented by not defecating outdoors and by effective sewage disposal systems.