Topic: Parasites - Zoonotic Hookworm

Q: What is (are) Parasites - Zoonotic Hookworm ?
A: There are many different species of hookworms, some are human parasites and some are animal parasites. People can be infected by larvae of animal hookworms, usually dog and cat hookworms. The most common result of animal hookworm infection is a skin condition called cutaneous larva migrans.

---

Q: Who is at risk for Parasites - Zoonotic Hookworm? ?
A: Dog and cat hookworms are found throughout the world, especially in warmer climates. In the United States, zoonotic hookworms are found everywhere but more commonly along the East Coast than the West Coast. Worldwide, zoonotic hookworms are found in tropical and subtropical regions where the parasite is better able to survive because of environmental conditions. However, there is one type of dog and cat hookworm that is more commonly found in cooler climates.
    
The global burden of zoonotic hookworm in dogs and cats is not known; also, the amount of disease in people caused by these parasites is also unknown. Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) is most often reported by returning travelers to tropical regions who have had soil and/or sand exposures in places where dogs and cats are likely to have hookworms. However, CLM is likely causing significant problems for the people who live in less developed parts of the world, even though the disease is not reported regularly. In less developed areas of the world, dogs and cats are often free-ranging and have high rates of infection with hookworm which leads to widespread contamination of sand and soil. In a survey of a rural population in Brazil, the prevalence of CLM during the rainy season was 14.9% among children less than 5 years old and 0.7% among adults aged 20 years and older.

---

Q: How to diagnose Parasites - Zoonotic Hookworm ?
A: Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) is a clinical diagnosis based on the presence of the characteristic signs and symptoms, and exposure history to zoonotic hookworm. For example, the diagnosis can be made based on finding red, raised tracks in the skin that are very itchy. This is usually found on the feet or lower part of the legs on persons who have recently traveled to tropical areas and spent time at the beach. There is no blood test for zoonotic hookworm infection. Persons who think they have CLM should consult their health care provider for accurate diagnosis.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Parasites - Zoonotic Hookworm ?
A: The zoonotic hookworm larvae that cause cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) usually do not survive more than 5 – 6 weeks in the human host. In most patients with CLM, the signs and symptoms resolve without medical treatment. However, treatment may help control symptoms and help prevent secondary bacterial infections. Antiparasitic treatments may be prescribed by your health care provider.
    
More on: Resources For Health Professionals: Treatment

---

Q: How to prevent Parasites - Zoonotic Hookworm ?
A: Wearing shoes and taking other protective measures to avoid skin contact with sand or soil will prevent infection with zoonotic hookworms. Travelers to tropical and subtropical climates, especially where beach exposures are likely, should be advised to wear shoes and use protective mats or other coverings to prevent direct skin contact with sand or soil. Routine veterinary care of dogs and cats, including regular deworming, will reduce environmental contamination with zoonotic hookworm eggs and larvae. Prompt disposal of animal feces prevents eggs from hatching and contaminating soil -- which makes it important for control of this parasitic infection.