Topic: Pars planitis

Q: What is (are) Pars planitis ?
A: Pars planitis is a disease of the eye that is characterized by inflammation of the narrowed area (pars plana) between the colored part of the eye (iris) and the choroid. This may lead to blurred vision; dark, floating spots in the vision; and progressive vision loss. As the condition advances, cataracts, retinal detachment, or macular edema (fluid within the retina) may develop. Pars planitis most often affects young men and is generally not associated with any other disease or symptoms (idiopathic); however, it can be associated with other autoimmune conditions such as multiple sclerosis and sarcoidosis. Treatment typically includes corticosteroid drugs, immunosuppressive medications, and/or surgery.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Pars planitis ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of pars planitis? Pars planitis is characterized by inflammation of the narrowed area (pars plana) between the colored part of the eye (iris) and the choroid. This may lead to blurred vision; dark, floating spots in the vision; and progressive vision loss. Approximately 80% of cases are bilateral (affecting both eyes), although one eye is typically more affected than the other. As the condition advances, cataracts, retinal detachment, or macular edema (fluid within the retina) may develop.

---

Q: What causes Pars planitis ?
A: What causes pars planitis? The exact underlying cause of pars planitis is unknown. Scientists suspect that it is an autoimmune condition in which the body's immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissues (certain parts of the eyes, in this case). This is further supported by the fact that pars planitis is sometimes associated with other autoimmune conditions such as multiple sclerosis and sarcoidosis. Although most cases occur sporadically in people with no family history of the condition, pars planitis can rarely affect more than one family member. In these cases, there may be a genetic component; however, a disease-causing gene and specific inheritance pattern have not been identified.

---

Q: How to diagnose Pars planitis ?
A: How is pars planitis diagnosed? Pars planitis is typically diagnosed based on a specialized eye examination. During the exam, the ophthalmologist will typically see clusters of white blood cells trapped within the eyeball that are called snowballs (or "inflammatory exudate"). If these clusters are located on the pars plana, they are known as snowbanks. Snowbanks are considered a "hallmark" sign of pars planitis. It is often recommended that people over age 25 with pars planitis have an MRI of their brain and spine to rule out multiple sclerosis.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Pars planitis ?
A: How might pars planitis be treated? The first approach to treating pars planitis is corticosteroid eye drops or injections near the eye to control inflammation. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs, including aspirin) or steroid medications (such as prednisone) can be taken by mouth. If these strategies are not successful, other medications may be given to reduce the body's immune response (medications called immunosuppressants, such as methotrexate).  If medications are not effective, surgery may be considered. Cryotherapy has been performed in affected people to remove eye tissue that has inflammation. Although this surgery has been shown to be effective in restoring clarity of vision, there are concerns that it may cause damage to other parts of the eye. Another surgery, known as vitrectomy, can be done to remove cloudy fluid (vitreous humor) from the eye.