Topic: Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis and adenitis

Q: What is (are) Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis and adenitis ?
A: Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, cervical adenitis (PFAPA) is a periodic disease, which is a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by short episodes of illness that regularly recur for several years alternated with healthy periods. PFAPA is characterized by high fevers lasting three to six days and recurring every 21 to 28 days, accompanied by some or all of the signs noted in its name, namely mouth sores (aphthous stomatitis), sore throat (pharyngitis), and enlarged lymph nodes (cervical adenitis). The syndrome usually occurs in children younger than five years; although it has been reported in children up to 13 years. The syndrome is sporadic and non-hereditary. The course of PFAPA can be persistent for years before spontaneous, full resolution.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis and adenitis ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis and adenitis? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis and adenitis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of temperature regulation 90% Abnormality of the oral cavity 90% Arthralgia 90% Behavioral abnormality 90% Encephalitis 90% Lymphadenopathy 90% Migraine 90% Recurrent pharyngitis 90% Weight loss 90% Abdominal pain 7.5% Arthritis 7.5% Hepatomegaly 7.5% Malabsorption 7.5% Nausea and vomiting 7.5% Splenomegaly 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis and adenitis ?
A: What causes periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, cervical adenitis (PFAPA)? The cause of PFAPA is unknown, although viral or autoimmune causes have been suggested.

---

Q: How to diagnose Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis and adenitis ?
A: How is periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, cervical adenitis (PFAPA) diagnosed? There are no laboratory tests or imaging procedures specific to the diagnosis of PFAPA. This condition is clinically diagnosed in individuals who have a history of 3 or more episodes of fevers that last up to 5 days and recur at regular intervals without other evidence of acute illness. Pharyngitis (sore throat) plus adenopathy (swollen lymph nodes) or aphthous ulcers (canker sores) are also noted. Blood tests like white blood cell count, C-reactive protein, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) are often elevated during an acute attack (but normal between attacks). It is important to rule out other conditions that may present with similar symptoms (for example, strep throat). The dramatic response to treatment can help to confirm the diagnosis.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis and adenitis ?
A: How might periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis and cervical adenitis be treated? Treatment options that have been successful in improving symptoms of this condition include: oral steroids (prednisone or prednisolone), tonsillectomy with adenoidectomy and cimetidine.