Topic: Pili annulati

Q: What is (are) Pili annulati ?
A: Pili annulati is a hair disorder. In pili annulati, affected hair has a pattern of light and dark banding. People with pili annulati may describe their hair as "striped" or as having silvery beads. Pili annulati typically involves 20-80% of scalp hair, however it can involve facial and body hair as well. Affected hairs may be more prone to breakage.  Pili annulati can present in infancy, childhood, or later in life. It can be seen with the naked eye, however it may be more difficult to see in people with dark hair. Diagnosis is confirmed by polariscopic and/or electron microscopic examination of affected hairs. The condition runs in an autosomal dominant fashion in some families. Reduced penetrance and variable expression has been described. Sporadic cases have also been reported.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Pili annulati ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Pili annulati? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pili annulati. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Fine hair 90% Abnormality of the hair - Autosomal dominant inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.