Topic: Pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta

Q: What is (are) Pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta ?
A: Pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA) is the acute form of a skin condition called pityriasis lichenoides. Affected people generally develop a few to more than one hundred scaling papules which may become filled with blood and/or pus or erode into crusted red-brown spots. PLEVA generally resolves on its own within a few weeks to a few months; however, some people experience episodes of the condition on and off for years. Although PLEVA is diagnosed in people of all ages, it most commonly affects children and young adults. The exact underlying cause is unknown, but some scientists suspect that it may occur due to an exaggerated immune response or an overproduction of certain white blood cells (lymphoproliferative disorder). If treatment is necessary, recommended therapies may include oral antibiotic, sun exposure, topical steroids, immunomodulators (medications used to help regulate or normalize the immune system), phototherapy and/or systemic steroids.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta? Pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA) is the acute form of a skin condition called pityriasis lichenoides. It is characterized by the sudden onset of red patches that quickly develop into scaling papules. These papules may become filled with blood and/or pus or erode into crusted red-brown spots. People may also experience burning and itching of the affected area. Scarring and/or temporary discoloration of the skin may be present after the lesions have healed. Although PLEVA can affect almost any part of the body, it most commonly develops on the trunk and/or limbs (arms/legs). Affected people may have a few to more than one hundred papules. The skin abnormalities generally resolve without treatment in a few weeks to a few months; however, some people experience episodes of the condition on and off for years. Aside from the skin findings, most affected people do not experience any additional signs and symptoms. However, some may experience fever, headaches, joint pain and swelling of nearby lymph nodes. Febrile Ulceronecrotic Mucha-Haberman Disease is a rare and severe variant of PLEVA that is associated with unique signs and symptoms. For more information on this condition, please click here.

---

Q: What causes Pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta ?
A: What causes pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta? The exact underlying cause of pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA) is unknown. Some scientists suspect that it may occur due to an exaggerated immune response or hypersensitivity to an infection. Some of the infections that have been associated with PLEVA include: Toxoplasma gondii    Epstein-Barr virus HIV Cytomegalovirus Parvovirus (fifth disease) Staphylococcus aureus Group A beta-haemolytic streptococci Others scientists think the condition may be a benign lymphoproliferative disorder. These conditions are characterized by an overproduction of certain white blood cells (lymphocytes) which can result in tissue and organ damage.

---

Q: How to diagnose Pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta ?
A: How is pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta diagnosed? A diagnosis of pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta is often suspected based on characteristic signs and symptoms. A skin biopsy can be used to confirm the diagnosis. Additional laboratory testing may be ordered to investigate a possible cause such as an associated infection.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta ?
A: How might pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta be treated? Pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA) often resolves on its own within several weeks to several months. Depending on the severity of the condition and the symptoms present, treatment may not be necessary. If treatment is indicated, there are many different therapies that have been used to treat PLEVA with varying degrees of success. These include: Oral antibiotics Sun exposure Topical steroids Immunomodulators (medications used to help regulate or normalize the immune system) Phototherapy Systemic steroids Unfortunately, PLEVA may not always respond to treatment and relapses often occur when treatment is discontinued.