Topic: Plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 deficiency

Q: What is (are) Plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 deficiency ?
A: Plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) deficiency a rare disorder that causes premature breakdown of blood clots and a moderate bleeding syndrome. While spontaneous bleeding is rare, moderate hemorrhages of the knees, elbows, nose and gums may be triggered by mild trauma. In females, menstrual bleeding is often severe. Prolonged bleeding after surgery is also common.  PAI-1 deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SERPINE1 gene.  Fibrinolysis inhibitors, including epsilon-aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid, are usually effective in treating and preventing bleeding episodes.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 deficiency ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 deficiency? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Congenital onset - Menorrhagia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.