Topic: Polycystic ovarian syndrome

Q: What is (are) Polycystic ovarian syndrome ?
A: Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is a health problem that can affect a woman's menstrual cycle, ability to have children, hormones, heart, blood vessels, and appearance. Women with this condition typically have high levels of  hormones called androgens, missed or irregular periods, and many small cysts in their ovaries. The cause of PCOS is unknown, but probably involves a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Treatment for PCOS may involve birth control pills and medications for diabetes and infertility. Medicines called anti-androgens are also used to speed the growth of hair and clear acne.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Polycystic ovarian syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Polycystic ovarian syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Polycystic ovarian syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis - Amenorrhea - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Enlarged polycystic ovaries - Hirsutism - Obesity - Oligomenorrhea - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.