Topic: Polycystic liver disease

Q: What is (are) Polycystic liver disease ?
A: Polycystic liver disease is an inherited condition characterized by many cysts of various sizes scattered throughout the liver. Abdominal discomfort from swelling of the liver may occur; however, most affected individuals do not have any symptoms. In some cases, polycystic liver disease appears to occur randomly, with no apparent cause. Most cases are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Sometimes, cysts are found in the liver in association with the presence of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (AD-PKD). In fact, about half of the people who have AD-PKD experience liver cysts. However, kidney cysts are uncommon in those affected by polycystic liver disease.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Polycystic liver disease ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Polycystic liver disease? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Polycystic liver disease. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hepatomegaly 90% Polycystic kidney dysplasia 50% Abdominal pain 7.5% Abnormality of the pancreas 7.5% Aneurysm 7.5% Elevated alkaline phosphatase 7.5% Feeding difficulties in infancy 7.5% Gastrointestinal hemorrhage 7.5% Respiratory insufficiency 7.5% Abdominal distention - Abnormality of the cardiovascular system - Abnormality of the nervous system - Ascites - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Back pain - Increased total bilirubin - Polycystic liver disease - Renal cyst - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.