Topic: Porokeratosis of Mibelli

Q: What is (are) Porokeratosis of Mibelli ?
A: Porokeratosis of Mibelli is a skin condition that usually develops in children or young adults.  It begins as one or a few small, brownish bumps that grow into raised, bumpy patches.  These patches slowly increase in size over time.  The cause of this condition is unknown, though exposure to sunlight or other forms of radiation, genetic factors and a weakened immune system have been suggested as possible risk factors.  Porokeratosis of Mibelli may sometimes harm normal tissue underlying the affected area; it may also develop into skin cancer.  Treatment depends on the size, location, and aggressiveness of porokeratosis in each affected individual; it may include observation only, medication, or surgery.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Porokeratosis of Mibelli ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Porokeratosis of Mibelli? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Porokeratosis of Mibelli. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the skin 90% Hyperkeratosis 90% Cutaneous photosensitivity 50% Pruritus 50% Neoplasm of the skin 33% Abnormality of chromosome stability - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Middle age onset - Porokeratosis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Porokeratosis of Mibelli ?
A: How might porokeratosis of Mibelli be treated? Treatment depends on the size, location, and aggressiveness of porokeratosis of Mibelli.  Affected individuals are recommended to visit their personal physician regularly to watch for signs of skin cancer, limit sun exposure to the affected area, and use moisturizers as needed.  Imiquimod cream has been found to be an effective treatment, as has 5-fluorouracil cream.  A group of medications called retinoids (including acitretin and isotretinoin), as a pill or cream, may be another treatment option.  If a skin cancer develops from porokeratosis of Mibelli, surgery is recommended.