Topic: Pretibial epidermolysis bullosa

Q: What is (are) Pretibial epidermolysis bullosa ?
A: Pretibial epidermolysis bullosa is a rare form of epidermolysis bullosa, a condition characterized by fragile skin that blisters easily in response to minor injury or friction. In the pretibial form, specifically, the characteristic blisters and skin erosions develop predominantly on the front of the lower legs (known as the "pretibial region"). In some affected people, the feet, hands and/or nails may also be affected. Healing of the blisters is generally associated with hypertrophic scarring. Pretibial epidermolysis bullosa is caused by changes (mutations) in the COL7A1 gene and can be inherited in an autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Pretibial epidermolysis bullosa ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Pretibial epidermolysis bullosa? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pretibial epidermolysis bullosa. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal blistering of the skin 90% Abnormality of the fingernails 90% Abnormality of the toenails 90% Atypical scarring of skin 50% Pruritus 50% Hyperkeratosis 7.5% Lichenification 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Pretibial blistering - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.