Topic: PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia

Q: What is (are) PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia ?
A: PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia is a rare inherited condition characterized by recurrent seizures (epilepsy) and problems with movement. The signs and symptoms of this disorder usually begin between the ages of 5 and 10.  Problems with balance and coordination (ataxia) are usually the first symptoms of PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia. Affected children often have trouble walking. Their gait is unbalanced and wide-based, and they may fall frequently. Later, children with this condition develop episodes of involuntary muscle jerking or twitching (myoclonus), which cause additional problems with movement. Myoclonus can also affect muscles in the face, leading to difficulty swallowing and slurred speech (dysarthria).  Beginning later in childhood, some affected individuals develop tonic-clonic or grand mal seizures. These seizures involve a loss of consciousness, muscle rigidity, and convulsions. They often occur at night (nocturnally) while the person is sleeping.  PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia does not seem to affect intellectual ability. Although a few affected individuals have died in childhood, many have lived into adulthood.

---

Q: How many people are affected by PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia ?
A: The prevalence of PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia is unknown. The condition has been reported in three large families from Jordan and northern Israel and in at least two unrelated individuals.

---

Q: What are the genetic changes related to PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia ?
A: PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia is caused by mutations in the PRICKLE1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called prickle homolog 1, whose function is unknown. Studies suggest that it interacts with other proteins that are critical for brain development and function.  Mutations in the PRICKLE1 gene alter the structure of prickle homolog 1 and disrupt its ability to interact with other proteins. However, it is unclear how these changes lead to movement problems, seizures, and the other features of PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia.

---

Q: Is PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia inherited ?
A: Some cases of PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  Other cases of PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia are considered autosomal dominant because one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. These cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.

---

Q: What are the treatments for PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia ?
A: These resources address the diagnosis or management of PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: PRICKLE1-Related Progressive Myoclonus Epilepsy with Ataxia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Progressive myoclonus epilepsy with ataxia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care