Topic: Primary gastrointestinal melanoma

Q: What is (are) Primary gastrointestinal melanoma ?
A: Primary melanoma of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract refers to a melanoma starting in the stomach, intestines, salivary glands, mouth, esophagus, liver, pancreas, gallbladder, or rectum. Melanoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the melanocytes. Melanocytes are commonly found in the skin and are the cells that give the skin color. While it is not uncommon for melanomas to start in the skin and later spread to other parts of the body, melanomas originating in the gastrointestinal tract are rare. The most frequently reported site is in the esophagus and anorectum.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Primary gastrointestinal melanoma ?
A: What are the symptoms of primary melanoma of the small intestine? Symptoms of primary melanoma of the small intestine can vary from person to person. Symptoms tend to be non-specific including nausea, vomiting, stomachache, fatigue, hemorrhage (broken blood vessels), and anemia (low red blood cell count).

---

Q: What causes Primary gastrointestinal melanoma ?
A: What causes primary melanoma of the small intestine? The cause of primary melanoma of the small intestine is currently unknown. Theories include that the cancer originated from a undetectable primary tumor that spontaneously (naturally) regressed on its own; that the cancer originated from a primary tumor that is so small it can not be detected using standard clinical and laboratory investigations; lastly, because melanocytes are not normally found in the stomach, a final theory is that the melanocytes are in the stomach because early melanocyte cells lost their way during the development of the baby in the womb, and that these misplaced cells later became cancerous.

---

Q: How to diagnose Primary gastrointestinal melanoma ?
A: How might primary melanoma of the small intestine be diagnosed? A variety of tests may be involved in the initial diagnosis of the tumor, including contrast radiography, endoscopy, and CT scan. The tumor is confirmed by surgical resection. Careful study of tissue samples from the tumor under a microscope will show the same immunohistochemical characteristics of skin melanomas. Once this has been established, the following are proposed diagnostic criteria for primary melanoma of the small intestine: 1. The absence of a previous or synchronously resected melanoma or atypical melanocytic lesion of the skin. 2. The absence of metastatic spread to other organs. 3. The presence of intramucosal lesions of the overlying or adjacent intestinal mucosa.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Primary gastrointestinal melanoma ?
A: How might primary melanoma of the small intestine be treated? Treatment of primary melanoma of the small intestine often involves the surgical resection of the tumor. We encourage you to speak with your healthcare provider to learn more about your surgical and other treatment options.