Topic: Primary orthostatic tremor

Q: What is (are) Primary orthostatic tremor ?
A: Primary orthostatic tremor is a movement disorder characterized by rhythmic muscle contractions that occur in the legs and trunk immediately after standing. It may be perceived more as an unsteadiness than an actual tremor. The tremor may disappear or improve when a person is sitting or walking. Over time, the tremors may become more severe, affecting quality of life and causing increasing disability. In some cases, primary orthostatic tremor may occur with other movement disorders. Individuals with primary orthostatic tremor may be treated with clonazepam and primidone. The cause of this condition is unknown.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Primary orthostatic tremor ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Primary orthostatic tremor? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Primary orthostatic tremor. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) EMG abnormality 90% Flexion contracture 90% Tremor 90% Myalgia 50% Abnormality of extrapyramidal motor function 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.