Topic: Prinzmetal's variant angina

Q: What is (are) Prinzmetal's variant angina ?
A: Prinzmetal's variant angina is characterized by recurrent episodes of chest pain that occur while an individual is at rest. This condition is a form of unstable angina because the episodes do not occur in a predictable pattern. Prinzmetal's variant angina may occur spontaneously, or it may be caused by exposure to cold, emotional stress, alcohol withdrawal, or vasoconstricting medications. The symptoms of this condition usually respond to treatment. Individuals with Prinzmetals' variant angina may have a higher risk for heart attack or arrhythmia.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Prinzmetal's variant angina ?
A: What are the symptoms of Prinzmetal's variant angina? The main symptom of Prinzmetal's variant angina is chest pain (angina) with the following characteristics: Occurs under the chest bone Described as squeezing, constricting, tightness, pressure, crushing Is usually severe and may radiate to the neck, jaw, shoulder, or arm Often occurs at rest Typically occurs at the same time each day, usually between midnight and 8am. Duration of pain is 5 to 30 minutes Pain is relieved by nitroglycerin Loss of consciousness

---

Q: What causes Prinzmetal's variant angina ?
A: What causes Prinzmetal's variant angina? Prinzmetal's variant angina is caused by coronary artery spasms. A coronary artery spasm is a temporary, abrupt, and focal (restricted to one location) contraction of the muscles in the wall of an artery in the heart. This spasm constricts the artery, slowing or stoping blood flow. A prolonged spasm can cause chest pain, or even a heart attack (myocardial infarction).

---

Q: What are the treatments for Prinzmetal's variant angina ?
A: What is the treatment for Prinzmetal's variant angina? The goal of treatment is to control chest pain and to prevent heart attack. Nitroglycerin or other nitrate medications may be prescribed to relieve chest pain. Calcium-channel blockers may be chronically needed. These medications widen the blood vessels to improve blood and oxygen flow. Medications may also include beta-blockers; however, in some individuals, beta-blockers may be harmful.