Topic: Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 2

Q: What is (are) Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 2 ?
A: Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 2 (PFIC2) is a rare condition that affects the liver. People with this condition generally develop signs and symptoms during infancy, which may include severe itching, jaundice, failure to thrive, portal hypertension (high blood pressure in the vein that provides blood to the liver) and hepatosplenomegaly (enlarged liver and spleen). PFIC2 generally progresses to liver failure in the first few years of life. Affected people also have an increased risk of developing hepatocellular carcinoma (a form of liver cancer). PFIC2 is caused by change (mutations) in the ABCB11 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment may include ursodeoxycholic acid therapy to prevent liver damage, surgery and/or liver transplantation.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 2 ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 2? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cirrhosis - Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia - Death in childhood - Diarrhea - Elevated alkaline phosphatase - Failure to thrive - Fat malabsorption - Hepatocellular carcinoma - Hepatomegaly - Infantile onset - Intermittent jaundice - Intrahepatic cholestasis - Pruritus - Short stature - Splenomegaly - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.