Topic: Prune belly syndrome

Q: What is (are) Prune belly syndrome ?
A: Prune belly syndrome, also called Eagle-Barrett syndrome, is a condition characterized by three main features: (1) a lack of abdominal muscles, causing the skin on the belly area to wrinkle and appear "prune-like";  (2) undescended testicles in males; and (3) urinary tract problems. The incidence of prune belly syndrome (PBS) is 1 in 40,000 births; 95% of cases occur in boys. The severity of symptoms in infants with prune belly syndrome can vary greatly from child to child.  At one end of the spectrum, the condition may cause severe urogenital and pulmonary problems incompatible with life (resulting in stillbirth); at the other end of the spectrum, the condition may cause few, if any, urological abnormalities that require no treatment other than  undescended testicle repair in males. The cause of the condition is unknown.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Prune belly syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Prune belly syndrome? The severity of symptoms in infants with prune belly syndrome can vary greatly from child to child. Common symptoms are poorly developed abdominal muscles, undescended testicles in males, and urinary tract problems such as swelling of the kidney, abnormally developed kidneys, and enlarged ureters, bladder, and urethra. Prune belly syndrome may also cause lung, heart, gastrointestinal, and other organ, bone, and muscle damage. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Prune belly syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the abdominal wall musculature 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the lungs 90% Cryptorchidism 90% Decreased fertility 90% Neoplasm of the thymus 90% Vesicoureteral reflux 90% Abnormal immunoglobulin level 50% Abnormality of the ribs 50% Acrocyanosis 50% Chest pain 50% Constipation 50% Diaphragmatic paralysis 50% Mediastinal lymphadenopathy 50% Multicystic kidney dysplasia 50% Oligohydramnios 50% Periorbital edema 50% Recurrent respiratory infections 50% Recurrent urinary tract infections 50% Renal insufficiency 50% Respiratory insufficiency 50% Abnormality of coagulation 7.5% Abnormality of the hip bone 7.5% Abnormality of the pericardium 7.5% Atria septal defect 7.5% Autoimmunity 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Fatigable weakness 7.5% Feeding difficulties in infancy 7.5% Increased intracranial pressure 7.5% Intestinal malrotation 7.5% Migraine 7.5% Neuroendocrine neoplasm 7.5% Neurological speech impairment 7.5% Patent ductus arteriosus 7.5% Pectus excavatum 7.5% Ptosis 7.5% Scoliosis 7.5% Sudden cardiac death 7.5% Talipes 7.5% Tetralogy of Fallot 7.5% Urogenital fistula 7.5% Urogenital sinus anomaly 7.5% Ventricular septal defect 7.5% Vertebral segmentation defect 7.5% Volvulus 7.5% Abnormality of the skin - Anal atresia - Aplasia of the abdominal wall musculature - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Congenital hip dislocation - Congenital posterior urethral valve - Hydronephrosis - Hydroureter - Pectus carinatum - Prune belly - Talipes equinovarus - Xerostomia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Prune belly syndrome ?
A: What causes prune belly syndrome? The underlying cause of prune belly syndrome is unknown. The condition may occur if there is a blockage preventing the flow of urine through the urinary tract. The blockage can cause the urine to flow back into the bladder, enlarging it.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Prune belly syndrome ?
A: How might prune belly syndrome be treated? The initial evaluation of the newborn with prune belly syndrome requires a team consisting of a neonatologist, nephrologist, urologist and in some cases other specialists (e.g., cardiologist) as well. Treatment options depend on the child's age, health, medical history, extend of disease, tolerance for certain treatments or procedures, the expected course of the disease, and the parent's and/or guardian's opinions and preferences.[832] In general, surgery may be done to repair abdominal muscle, genital, and bladder problems.  Antibiotics may be given to infants to treat or prevent urinary tract infections. Timing of therapy may vary from patient to patient. To learn more about your childs specific treatment options we recommend that you speak to her healthcare provider.