Topic: Pseudopelade of Brocq

Q: What is (are) Pseudopelade of Brocq ?
A: Pseudopelade of Brocq (PBB) is a slowly progressive, chronic condition characterized by scarring hair loss (cicatricial alopecia). There exists some controversy as to whether PBB is a distinct condition or the common final stage or variant of several different forms of scarring alopecias such as discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) or lichen planopilaris (LPP). Some have suggested abandoning the use of the term pseudopelade of Brocq while others think that the term should be strictly used to describe patients that follow the pattern of hair loss described by Brocq et al.(i.e., multiple, small, discrete, asymmetrical, smooth, soft, flesh-colored or white patches of hair loss with little, if any, inflammation). Although the exact cause of PBB has not been identified, it is believed to be an autoimmune disease. Some individuals with PBB have been found to have Borrelia burgdorferi, the bacterium that causes Lyme disease.  Neither an effective treatment nor cure is currently available.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Pseudopelade of Brocq ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Pseudopelade of Brocq? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pseudopelade of Brocq. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Alopecia 90% Hypertrichosis 90% Lichenification 90% Skin ulcer 50% Abnormality of the nail 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the eyebrow 7.5% Cheilitis 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Pseudopelade of Brocq ?
A: Is there treatment or a cure for pseudopelade of Brocq? Neither an effective treatment nor cure has been identified for pseudopelade of Brocq.  Unfortunately, even when treatment relieves the symptoms and signs, the progression of hair loss may continue. The choice of treatment prescribed varies from person to person and depends mainly on the activity, extent of the disease and patient's tolerance to the treatment. Various forms of corticosteroids have been tried, including injections or skin lotions or creams. Surgery such as hair transplant or scalp reduction might be considered in patients whose condition has remained stable for two or more years.