Topic: Pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1C

Q: What is (are) Pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1C ?
A: Pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1C is a genetic disorder that is very similar to hypoparathyroidism (parathyroid hormone levels are too low). However, pseudohypoparathyroidism is caused by no response to parathyroid hormone rather than having too little of the hormone itself. This causes low calcium and high phosphate levels in the blood. This condition is also associated with  a group of symptoms referred to as Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy, which includes short stature, a round face, obesity, and short hand bones. This disorder is different than pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1A because people with type 1C do not have abnormal activity of a particular protein (stimulatory protein G (Gs alpha)). Type 1C is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion and is caused by a specific spelling mistake (mutation) in the GNAS gene.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1C ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1C? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1C. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Basal ganglia calcification - Brachydactyly syndrome - Cataract - Choroid plexus calcification - Cognitive impairment - Delayed eruption of teeth - Depressed nasal bridge - Elevated circulating parathyroid hormone (PTH) level - Full cheeks - Hyperphosphatemia - Hypocalcemic tetany - Hypogonadism - Hypoplasia of dental enamel - Hypothyroidism - Intellectual disability - Low urinary cyclic AMP response to PTH administration - Nystagmus - Obesity - Osteoporosis - Pseudohypoparathyroidism - Round face - Seizures - Short metacarpal - Short metatarsal - Short neck - Short stature - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.