Topic: Pterygium colli mental retardation digital anomalies

Q: What are the symptoms of Pterygium colli mental retardation digital anomalies ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Pterygium colli mental retardation digital anomalies? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pterygium colli mental retardation digital anomalies. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of calvarial morphology 90% Abnormality of the distal phalanx of finger 90% Abnormality of the pinna 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the thumb 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Epicanthus 90% Highly arched eyebrow 90% Hypertelorism 90% Joint hypermobility 90% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 90% Lymphedema 90% Muscular hypotonia 90% Narrow forehead 90% Proximal placement of thumb 90% Ptosis 90% Upslanted palpebral fissure 90% Webbed neck 90% Brachycephaly - Broad distal phalanx of finger - Edema of the dorsum of feet - Edema of the dorsum of hands - Epicanthus inversus - Intellectual disability - Low-set ears - Posteriorly rotated ears - Protruding ear - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.