Topic: Pulmonary vein stenosis

Q: What is (are) Pulmonary vein stenosis ?
A: Pulmonary vein stenosis is a very rare and serious condition in which there is a blockage in the blood vessels that bring oxygen-rich blood from the lungs back to the heart. This condition can be isolated to one vein, but often affects multiple veins. Stenosis occurs when there is an abnormal thickening and narrowing of the walls of the veins. Pulmonary vein stenosis is a progressive condition and may lead to total obstruction to a blood vessel. Most commonly, all of the pulmonary veins of one lung are affected, causing pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary arterial hypertension. Surgery and catheterization to widen the narrow veins is usually a short-term solution since the obstruction typically recurs.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Pulmonary vein stenosis ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Pulmonary vein stenosis? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pulmonary vein stenosis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hypertension 90% Respiratory insufficiency 50% Abnormality of the cardiac septa 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.