Topic: Pyle disease

Q: What is (are) Pyle disease ?
A: Pyle disease is a bone disorder characterized by genu valgum (knock knees), Erlenmeyer flask deformity (where there is relative constriction of the diaphysis or shaft of the bone and flaring of the metaphysis or end of the bone), widening of the ribs and clavicles (collarbones), platyspondyly (flattening of the bones of the spine) and cortical thinning. Only about 30 cases have been reported in the literature. Cranial involvement is minimal with some showing mild hyperostosis (excessive new bone formation ) of the skull base and thickening of the frontal and occipital bones. Pyle disease is passed through families in an autosomal recessive manner.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Pyle disease ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Pyle disease? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pyle disease. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Genu valgum 90% Abnormality of pelvic girdle bone morphology 50% Abnormality of the clavicle 50% Abnormality of the elbow 50% Abnormality of the ribs 50% Craniofacial hyperostosis 50% Mandibular prognathia 50% Prominent supraorbital ridges 50% Recurrent fractures 50% Scoliosis 50% Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 7.5% Carious teeth 7.5% Dental malocclusion 7.5% Abnormality of the thorax - Arthralgia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Limited elbow extension - Metaphyseal dysplasia - Muscle weakness - Platyspondyly - Thickened calvaria - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: Is Pyle disease inherited ?
A: Is Pyle disease inherited? Pyle disease in inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they often don't have any signs and symptoms of the condition. Some carriers (obligate heterozygotes) of Pyle disease show minor skeletal changes.