Topic: Renal nutcracker syndrome

Q: What is (are) Renal nutcracker syndrome ?
A: Renal nutcracker syndrome (NCS) is a condition that occurs when the left renal vein (the vein that carries blood purified by the left kidney) becomes compressed. The signs and symptoms of the condition can vary from person to person. Some affected people may be asymptomatic while others develop severe and persistent symptoms. When present, features of NCS may include blood in the urine (hematuria), orthostatic proteinuria, flank pain and/or abdominal pain. Some cases of mild NCS in children may be due to changes in body proportions associated with growth. Why NCS occurs or becomes symptomatic in adults is less clear. Treatment ranges from surveillance to surgical intervention and is based on the severity of symptoms and their expected reversibility when considering the affected person's age and stage of the syndrome.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Renal nutcracker syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of renal nutcracker syndrome? The signs and symptoms of renal nutcracker syndrome and the disease severity can vary from person to person. Some affected people may be asymptomatic while others have severe and persistent symptoms. Symptoms are often aggravated by physical activity. When present, symptoms of the condition may include blood in the urine (hematuria), orthostatic proteinuria, flank pain and/or abdominal pain. Some people may also experience orthostatic intolerance, which is characterized by symptoms such as light-headedness, palpitations, poor concentration, fatigue, nausea, dizziness, headache, sweating, weakness and occasionally fainting when upright standing. Men who are affected by renal nutcracker syndrome may develop a varicocele. Affected women may have gynecological symptoms such as dyspareunia and dysmenorrhea (painful periods).

---

Q: Is Renal nutcracker syndrome inherited ?
A: Is renal nutcracker syndrome inherited? Renal nutcracker syndrome is not inherited. Most cases occur sporadically in people with no family history of the condition. Although more than one family member may rarely be affected, this is thought to be a coincidence and not the result of a genetic predisposition.

---

Q: How to diagnose Renal nutcracker syndrome ?
A: How is Renal nutcracker syndrome diagnosed? A diagnosis of renal nutcracker syndrome is often suspected based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms once other conditions that cause similar features have been ruled out. Additional testing can then be ordered to support the diagnosis. This may include urine tests, imaging studies of the kidneys (i.e. doppler ultrasonography, computed tomography angiography, magnetic resonance angiography, retrograde venography), and/or cystoscopy.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Renal nutcracker syndrome ?
A: How might renal nutcracker syndrome be treated? Treatment of renal nutcracker syndrome is based on severity of symptoms and their expected reversibility when considering the affected person's age and stage of the syndrome. Adults with mild cases and affected children may be treated conservatively with regular surveillance. People younger than 18 years, specifically, are often observed for at least 2 years because as many as 75% will have complete resolution of symptoms without any significant intervention. ACE inhibitors may be effective in treating orthostatic proteinuria. In those with severe symptoms who do not respond to more conservative treatments, surgery is often recommended.