Topic: Ribbing disease

Q: What is (are) Ribbing disease ?
A: Ribbing disease is a rare bone disease that causes bony growths on the long bones, such as the thigh bone and shine bone. Ribbing disease affects women more frequently than men. The most common symptom is pain. A single study of 14 patients found an association between Ribbing disease and impaired exercise tolerance and changes in heart function (i.e., increased prevalence of arrhythmia and changes in left ventricular systolic and diastolic function). The cause of the condition is currently unknown, although some cases appear to be genetic and inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. Optimal treatment for the disease is largely unknown. There have been case reports describing treatment of Ribbing disease with bisphosphonate pamidronate. Results have been mixed. The condition often resolves on its own; however cases of progressive disease have been described.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Ribbing disease ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Ribbing disease? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Ribbing disease. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Diaphyseal sclerosis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.