Topic: Rienhoff syndrome

Q: What are the symptoms of Rienhoff syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Rienhoff syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Rienhoff syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Brachycephaly 5% Broad face 5% Bruising susceptibility 5% Cerebral hemorrhage 5% Cervical spine instability 5% Dolichocephaly 5% Hypoplasia of midface 5% Long face 5% Motor delay 5% Patent foramen ovale 5% Ptosis 5% Smooth philtrum 5% Spondylolisthesis 5% Talipes equinovarus 5% Ventricular septal defect 5% Arachnodactyly - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Bifid uvula - Bilateral coxa valga - Blue sclerae - Cleft palate - Decreased muscle mass - Exotropia - Hiatus hernia - High palate - Hypertelorism - Hyporeflexia - Increased arm span - Inguinal hernia - Joint hypermobility - Kyphoscoliosis - Mitral regurgitation - Pectus carinatum - Pectus excavatum - Pes planus - Proptosis - Retrognathia - Short stature - Small for gestational age - Tall stature - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.