Topic: Ring chromosome 20

Q: What is (are) Ring chromosome 20 ?
A: Ring chromosome 20 is a chromosome abnormality that affects the development and function of the brain. People with ring chromosome 20 often have recurrent seizures or epilepsy. Other symptoms might include intellectual disability, behavioral difficulties, growth delay, short stature, a small head (microcephaly), and characteristic facial features. Ring chromosome 20 is caused by an abnormal chromosome known as a ring chromosome 20 or r(20). A ring chromosome is a circular structure that occurs when a chromosome breaks in two places and its broken ends fuse together. Ring chromosome 20 is usually not inherited. It almost always occurs by chance during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or in early embryonic development. Treatment for ring chromosome 20 is focused on management of seizures and accommodations for learning.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Ring chromosome 20 ?
A: How might ring chromosome 20 be treated? Treatment of ring chromosome 20 is typically focused on management of seizures. The seizures associated with ring chromosome 20 do not generally respond well to medications. The treatment that is successful varies from person to person. Broad spectrum AEDs are usually tried first since they are active against different seizure types. This includes valproate, levetiracetam, lamotrigine, topiramate and zonisamide. Success has been reported in some people with a combination of valproate and lamotrigine, but so far no single therapy has worked for everyone.  Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) has been tried and a reduction in seizures has been reported in some cases but not in others. This involves implanting a medical device under the skin, similar to a pacemaker that delivers a mild electrical current to the brain via the vagus nerve. The long-term effectiveness of VNS therapy is not yet known.  The ketogenic diet, which is high in fat and low in carbohydrate, has been shown to be helpful in other types of epilepsy. However there are no published reports about whether this is successful or not in ring chromosome 20 epilepsy. For more information on treatment of seizures in people with R20 and general information on ring chromosome 20, visit the following link from Unique, The Rare Chromosome Disorder Support Group, a non-profit organization that supports chromosomal disorders.  http://www.rarechromo.org/information/Chromosome%2020/Ring%2020%20FTNW.pdf