Topic: Severe intellectual disability-progressive spastic diplegia syndrome

Q: What is (are) Severe intellectual disability-progressive spastic diplegia syndrome ?
A: Severe intellectual disability-progressive spastic diplegia syndrome is a rare condition that has been described in a few people with severe intellectual disability . Other signs and symptoms include progressive microcephaly (very small head); ataxia (lack of coordination); spasticity; and/or skin, hair and mild facial anomalies. It is caused by changes (mutations) in the CTNNB1 gene and it is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Severe intellectual disability-progressive spastic diplegia syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Severe intellectual disability-progressive spastic diplegia syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Severe intellectual disability-progressive spastic diplegia syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum - Intellectual disability - Microcephaly - Muscular hypotonia - Spastic diplegia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.