Topic: Sialidosis type I

Q: What is (are) Sialidosis type I ?
A: Sialidosis is a severe inherited disorder that affects many organs and tissues, including the nervous system. This disorder is divided into two types, which are distinguished by the age at which symptoms appear and the severity of features. Sialidosis type I is the less severe form of this condition. People with this condition typically develop signs and symptoms of sialidosis in their teens or twenties. Characteristic features may include sudden involuntary muscle contractions (myoclonus), distinctive red spots (cherry-red macules) in the eyes, and sometimes additional neurological findings. Sialidosis type I is caused by mutations in the NEU1 gene. Individuals with sialidosis type I have mutations that result in some functional NEU1 enzyme. The condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. It does not affect intelligence or life expectancy.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Sialidosis type I ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Sialidosis type I? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Sialidosis type I. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the macula 90% Aminoaciduria 90% Coarse facial features 90% Delayed skeletal maturation 90% Gait disturbance 90% Hyperkeratosis 90% Incoordination 90% Neurological speech impairment 90% Nystagmus 90% Opacification of the corneal stroma 90% Pectus carinatum 90% Retinopathy 90% Scoliosis 90% Seizures 90% Sensorineural hearing impairment 90% Short stature 90% Short thorax 90% Skeletal dysplasia 90% Splenomegaly 90% Thick lower lip vermilion 90% Visual impairment 90% Wide nasal bridge 90% Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Decreased nerve conduction velocity 50% EEG abnormality 50% Frontal bossing 50% Hernia 50% Morphological abnormality of the central nervous system 50% Muscular hypotonia 50% Skeletal muscle atrophy 50% Tremor 50% Cataract 7.5% Kyphosis 7.5% Ascites - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Bone-marrow foam cells - Cardiomegaly - Cardiomyopathy - Cherry red spot of the macula - Dysmetria - Dysostosis multiplex - Epiphyseal stippling - Facial edema - Hepatomegaly - Hydrops fetalis - Hyperreflexia - Increased urinary O-linked sialopeptides - Inguinal hernia - Intellectual disability - Muscle weakness - Myoclonus - Progressive visual loss - Proteinuria - Slurred speech - Urinary excretion of sialylated oligosaccharides - Vacuolated lymphocytes - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Sialidosis type I ?
A: How might sialidosis type I be treated? There is no specific treatment for sialidosis. Management should be multidisciplinary and directed at supportive care and symptomatic relief. Overall health maintenance should be a priority, with seizure control as necessary. Myoclonic seizures often respond poorly to treatment with anticonvulsant medications.