Topic: Sjgren syndrome

Q: What is (are) Sjgren syndrome ?
A: Sjgren syndrome is a disorder whose main features are dry eyes and a dry mouth. The condition typically develops gradually beginning in middle adulthood, but can occur at any age.  Sjgren syndrome is classified as an autoimmune disorder, one of a large group of conditions that occur when the immune system attacks the body's own tissues and organs. In Sjgren syndrome, the immune system primarily attacks the glands that produce tears (the lacrimal glands) and saliva (the salivary glands), impairing the glands' ability to secrete these fluids.  Dry eyes may lead to itching, burning, a feeling of sand in the eyes, blurry vision, or intolerance of bright or fluorescent lighting. A dry mouth can feel chalky or full of cotton, and affected individuals may have difficulty speaking, tasting food, or swallowing. Because saliva helps protect the teeth and the tissues of the oral cavity, people with Sjgren syndrome are at increased risk of tooth decay and infections in the mouth.  In most people with Sjgren syndrome, dry eyes and dry mouth are the primary features of the disorder, and general health and life expectancy are largely unaffected. However, in some cases the immune system also attacks and damages other organs and tissues. This complication is known as extraglandular involvement. Affected individuals may develop inflammation in connective tissues, which provide strength and flexibility to structures throughout the body. Disorders involving connective tissue inflammation are sometimes called rheumatic conditions. In Sjgren syndrome, extraglandular involvement may result in painful inflammation of the joints and muscles; dry, itchy skin and skin rashes; chronic cough; a hoarse voice; kidney and liver problems; numbness or tingling in the hands and feet; and, in women, vaginal dryness. Prolonged and extreme tiredness (fatigue) severe enough to affect activities of daily living may also occur in this disorder. A small number of people with Sjgren syndrome develop lymphoma, a blood-related cancer that causes tumor formation in the lymph nodes.  When Sjgren syndrome first occurs on its own, it is called primary Sjgren syndrome. Some individuals who are first diagnosed with another rheumatic disorder, such as rheumatoid arthritis or systemic lupus erythematosus, later develop the dry eyes and dry mouth characteristic of Sjgren syndrome. In such cases, the individual is said to have secondary Sjgren syndrome. Other autoimmune disorders can also develop after the onset of primary Sjgren syndrome. In all, about half of all individuals with Sjgren syndrome also have another autoimmune disorder.

---

Q: How many people are affected by Sjgren syndrome ?
A: Sjgren syndrome is a relatively common disorder; it occurs in 0.1 to 4 percent of the population. It is difficult to determine the exact prevalence because the characteristic features of this disorder, dry eyes and dry mouth, can also be caused by many other conditions. Women develop Sjgren syndrome about 10 times more often than men; the specific reason for this difference is unknown but likely involves the effects of sex hormones on immune system function.

---

Q: What are the genetic changes related to Sjgren syndrome ?
A: Sjgren syndrome is thought to result from a combination of genetic and environmental factors; however, no associations between specific genetic changes and the development of Sjgren syndrome have been confirmed. Researchers believe that variations in many genes affect the risk of developing Sjgren syndrome, but that development of the condition may be triggered by something in the environment. In particular, viral or bacterial infections, which activate the immune system, may have the potential to encourage the development of Sjgren syndrome in susceptible individuals. The genetic variations that increase susceptibility may reduce the body's ability to turn off the immune response when it is no longer needed.

---

Q: Is Sjgren syndrome inherited ?
A: A predisposition to develop autoimmune disorders can be passed through generations in families. Relatives of people with Sjgren syndrome are at an increased risk of developing autoimmune diseases, although they are not necessarily more likely to develop Sjgren syndrome in particular. The inheritance pattern of this predisposition is unknown.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Sjgren syndrome ?
A: These resources address the diagnosis or management of Sjgren syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Sjgren's syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Schirmer's Test  - National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research: Sjgren's Syndrome Clinic  - Sjgren's Syndrome Foundation: Treatments   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care