Topic: Spastic paraplegia 2

Q: What are the symptoms of Spastic paraplegia 2 ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Spastic paraplegia 2? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spastic paraplegia 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Gait disturbance 90% Hyperreflexia 90% Muscle weakness 90% Abnormal renal physiology 50% Abnormality of extrapyramidal motor function 50% Bowel incontinence 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Optic atrophy 50% Incoordination 7.5% Limitation of joint mobility 7.5% Neurological speech impairment 7.5% Nystagmus 7.5% Pulmonary embolism 7.5% Recurrent respiratory infections 7.5% Babinski sign - Degeneration of the lateral corticospinal tracts - Dysarthria - Dysmetria - Flexion contracture - Intellectual disability - Juvenile onset - Lower limb muscle weakness - Lower limb spasticity - Pes cavus - Phenotypic variability - Skeletal muscle atrophy - Spastic gait - Spastic paraparesis - Spastic paraplegia - Spinocerebellar tract degeneration - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.