Topic: Spastic ataxia Charlevoix-Saguenay type

Q: What are the symptoms of Spastic ataxia Charlevoix-Saguenay type ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Spastic ataxia Charlevoix-Saguenay type? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spastic ataxia Charlevoix-Saguenay type. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Absent Achilles reflex - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Babinski sign - Cerebellar vermis atrophy - Decreased nerve conduction velocity - Decreased number of large peripheral myelinated nerve fibers - Decreased sensory nerve conduction velocity - Distal amyotrophy - Distal muscle weakness - Distal sensory impairment - Dysarthria - Dysmetria - Falls - Hammertoe - Hyperreflexia - Impaired smooth pursuit - Impaired vibration sensation in the lower limbs - Infantile onset - Intellectual disability - Loss of Purkinje cells in the cerebellar vermis - Nystagmus - Pes cavus - Progressive gait ataxia - Progressive truncal ataxia - Scanning speech - Spastic ataxia - Spasticity - Swan neck-like deformities of the fingers - Urinary urgency - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.