Topic: Spinocerebellar ataxia 2

Q: What is (are) Spinocerebellar ataxia 2 ?
A: Spinocerebellar ataxia 2 (SCA2) is a progressive disorder that causes symptoms including uncoordinated movement (ataxia), speech and swallowing difficulties, muscle wasting, slow eye movement, and sometimes dementia. Signs and symptoms usually begin in mid-adulthood but can appear any time from childhood to late-adulthood. SCA2 is caused by mutations in the ATXN2 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Spinocerebellar ataxia 2 ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Spinocerebellar ataxia 2? Early symptoms of spinocerebellar ataxia may include uncoordinated movement (ataxia) and leg cramps. Other symptoms may include tremor; decreased muscle tone; poor tendon reflexes; abnormal eye movements; dementia; dystonia and/or chorea; muscle twitches; nerve irritation and swelling (polyneuropathy); leg weakness; difficulty swallowing; bladder dysfunction; and parkinsonism. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Bradykinesia - Dementia - Dilated fourth ventricle - Distal amyotrophy - Dysarthria - Dysdiadochokinesis - Dysmetria - Dysmetric saccades - Dysphagia - Fasciculations - Gaze-evoked nystagmus - Genetic anticipation - Hyporeflexia - Impaired horizontal smooth pursuit - Limb ataxia - Muscular hypotonia - Myoclonus - Oculomotor apraxia - Olivopontocerebellar atrophy - Ophthalmoplegia - Postural instability - Postural tremor - Progressive cerebellar ataxia - Rigidity - Rod-cone dystrophy - Slow saccadic eye movements - Spasticity - Spinocerebellar tract degeneration - Urinary bladder sphincter dysfunction - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: Is Spinocerebellar ataxia 2 inherited ?
A: How is spinocerebellar ataxia 2 inherited? Spinocerebellar ataxia 2 (SCA2) is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having one changed (mutated) copy of ATXN2 (the responsible gene) in each cell is enough to cause signs and symptoms of the condition. The ATXN2 gene mutations that cause SCA2 involve a DNA sequence called a 'CAG trinucleotide repeat.' It is made up of a series of three DNA building blocks (CAG stands for cytosine, adenine, and guanine) that appear multiple times in a row. The CAG sequence is normally repeated about 22 times in the gene, but it can be repeated up to 31 times without causing health problems. SCA2 develops in people who have 32 or more CAG repeats in the ATXN2 gene. In most cases, an affected person inherits the mutated gene (with too many repeats) from an affected parent. However, in some cases, an affected person does not have an affected parent. People with an increased number of CAG repeats who don't develop SCA2 are still at risk of having children who will develop the disorder. This is because as the gene is passed down from parent to child, the number of CAG repeats often increases. In general, the more repeats a person has, the earlier symptoms begin. This phenomenon is called anticipation. People with 32 or 33 repeats tend to develop symptoms in late adulthood, while people with more than 45 repeats often have symptoms by their teens.  For some reason, the number of repeats tend to increase more when the gene is inherited from a person's father than when inherited from a person's mother. Each child of an affected person has a 50% chance of inheriting the CAG repeat expansion.

---

Q: How to diagnose Spinocerebellar ataxia 2 ?
A: Is genetic testing available for spinocerebellar ataxia 2? Yes. Molecular genetic testing (analysis of DNA) is needed for a diagnosis of spinocerebellar ataxia 2 (SCA2). This testing detects abnormal CAG trinucleotide repeat expansions in the ATXN2 gene. Affected people (or people who will later develop symptoms of SCA2) have a copy of the ATXN2 gene that has 33 or more CAG repeats. This testing detects nearly 100% of cases of SCA2. The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) provides information about the labs that offer genetic testing for SCA2. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Therefore, patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Spinocerebellar ataxia 2 ?
A: How might spinocerebellar ataxia 2 be treated? Treatment of spinocerebellar ataxia 2 (SCA2) is supportive and aims to help the affected person maintain their independence and avoid injury. It is recommended that people with SCA2 remain physically active, maintain a healthy weight, use adaptive equipment as needed, and avoid alcohol and medications that affect cerebellar function. Adaptive equipment may include canes or other devices to help with walking and mobility. People with SCA2 may develop difficulty speaking and may need to use computerized devices or writing pads to help with communication. Levodopa may be prescribed to help with some of the movement problems (e.g., rigidity and tremor), and magnesium may improve muscle cramping.