Topic: Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress 1

Q: What are the symptoms of Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress 1 ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress 1? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Camptodactyly of finger - Constipation - Decreased fetal movement - Decreased nerve conduction velocity - Degeneration of anterior horn cells - Denervation of the diaphragm - Diaphragmatic eventration - Diaphragmatic paralysis - Distal amyotrophy - Distal muscle weakness - EMG: neuropathic changes - Failure to thrive - Hyperhidrosis - Hyporeflexia - Inspiratory stridor - Intrauterine growth retardation - Limb muscle weakness - Peripheral axonal degeneration - Premature birth - Respiratory failure - Small for gestational age - Spinal muscular atrophy - Tachypnea - Talipes equinovarus - Urinary incontinence - Ventilator dependence with inability to wean - Weak cry - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.