Topic: Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia Maroteaux type

Q: What is (are) Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia Maroteaux type ?
A: Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia (SED) Maroteaux type is a rare skeletal dysplasia that is characterized by short stature beginning in infancy, short, stubby hands and feet, and genu valgum (knock knees). In addition to these physical characteristics, individuals with SED Maroteaux type have some common radiographic findings, including platyspondyly (flattened vertebral bodies in the spine), abnormalities of the pelvis and severe brachydactyly (short fingers and toes). Intelligence is generally normal and there is no clouding of the cornea, which distinguishes SED Maroteaux type from other forms of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. SED Maroteaux type is caused by mutations in the TRPV4 gene and is inherited any an autosomal dominant fashion.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia Maroteaux type ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia Maroteaux type? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia Maroteaux type. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the eye - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Genu valgum - Platyspondyly - Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.