Topic: Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infection

Q: What is (are) Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infection ?
A: Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (S. maltophilia) infection is a healthcare-associated bacterial infection caused by S. maltophilia bacteria. These bacteria typically colonize (live in or on) areas of the body without causing infection. However, people who are hospitalized and receiving treatment for other conditions may be susceptible to infection, especially those with severely impaired immune systems. Factors that increase the risk for S. maltophilia infection include admission to an intensive care unit, prolonged hospitalization, HIV infection, cancer, cystic fibrosis, neutropenia, recent surgery, trauma, mechanical ventilation, and previous therapy with broad-spectrum antibiotics (medications that target a wide range of bacteria). S. maltophilia bacteria are resistant to many types of antibiotics; however, most strains can be treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole treatment.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infection ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infection? S. maltophilia bacteria usually colonize (live in or on) areas of the body without causing infection. In these cases, people have no signs or symptoms of a bacterial infection. When present, the features of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (S. maltophilia) infections are generally related to the organ system(s) involved. The most common manifestations are pneumonia and bacteremia. Less commonly, people infected by S. maltophilia may experience endocarditis, mastoiditis, peritonitis, meningitis, soft tissue infections, wound infections, urinary tract infections, and/or eye infections.

---

Q: What causes Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infection ?
A: What causes Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infection? Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (S. maltophilia) infections are caused by the S. maltophilia bacteria. These bacteria live in various aquatic (water-based) environments. In a hospital setting, they are able to survive and multiply in fluids such as respiratory secretions, urine, and intravenous (IV) fluids. Most healthy people do not get S. maltophilia infections. However, people who are hospitalized and receiving treatment for other conditions may be susceptible to these infections, especially those with severely impaired immune systems. Factors that increase the risk for S. maltophilia infection include admission to an intensive care unit, prolonged hospitalization, HIV infection, cancer, cystic fibrosis, neutropenia, recent surgery, trauma, mechanical ventilation, and previous therapy with broad-spectrum antibiotics (medications that target a wide range of bacteria).

---

Q: How to diagnose Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infection ?
A: How is Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infection diagnosed? Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (S. maltophilia) infection is usually diagnosed by examining a small sample of blood, mucus, and/or urine. When an infection is suspected, possible sites of infection including wounds, intravenous (vein) catheters, urinary catheters, and breathing machines should also be tested for the presence of S. maltophilia bacteria.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infection ?
A: How might Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infection be treated? Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (S. maltophilia) bacteria are usually resistant to many antibiotics. The recommended therapy is trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (also called co-trimoxazole, or TMP-SMX). If this medication can not be used, a variety of other antibiotics may be considered. Combination therapy may be necessary in life-threatening cases. The duration of therapy largely depends on the site of infection. More detailed information about medications used to treat S. maltophilia infection is available in Medscape Reference and can be viewed by clicking here. This information is intended for informational purposes only. People seeking treatment for S. maltophilia infection should consult with their health care provider.