Topic: succinyl-CoA:3-ketoacid CoA transferase deficiency

Q: What is (are) succinyl-CoA:3-ketoacid CoA transferase deficiency ?
A: Succinyl-CoA:3-ketoacid CoA transferase (SCOT) deficiency is an inherited disorder that impairs the body's ability to break down ketones, which are molecules produced in the liver during the breakdown of fats.  The signs and symptoms of SCOT deficiency typically appear within the first few years of life. Affected individuals experience episodes of extreme tiredness (lethargy), appetite loss, vomiting, rapid breathing, and, occasionally, seizures. These episodes, which are called ketoacidotic attacks, sometimes lead to coma. About half of affected individuals have a ketoacidotic attack within the first 4 days of life. Affected individuals have no symptoms of the disorder between ketoacidotic attacks.  People with SCOT deficiency usually have a permanently elevated level of ketones in their blood (persistent ketosis). If the level of ketones gets too high, which can be brought on by infections, fevers, or periods without food (fasting), a ketoacidotic attack can occur. The frequency of ketoacidotic attacks varies among affected individuals.

---

Q: How many people are affected by succinyl-CoA:3-ketoacid CoA transferase deficiency ?
A: The prevalence of SCOT deficiency is unknown. More than 20 cases of this condition have been reported in the scientific literature.

---

Q: What are the genetic changes related to succinyl-CoA:3-ketoacid CoA transferase deficiency ?
A: Mutations in the OXCT1 gene cause SCOT deficiency. The OXCT1 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called succinyl-CoA:3-ketoacid CoA transferase (SCOT). The SCOT enzyme is made in the energy-producing centers of cells (mitochondria). The enzyme plays a role in the breakdown of ketones, which are an important source of energy during fasting or when energy demands are increased, such as during illness or when exercising.  OXCT1 gene mutations result in the production of a SCOT enzyme with little or no function. A reduction in the amount of functional enzyme leads to an inability to break down ketones, resulting in decreased energy production and an elevated level of ketones in the blood. If these signs become severe, a ketoacidotic attack can occur. Individuals with mutations that create an enzyme with partial function are still prone to ketoacidotic attacks, but are less likely to have persistent ketosis.

---

Q: Is succinyl-CoA:3-ketoacid CoA transferase deficiency inherited ?
A: This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.

---

Q: What are the treatments for succinyl-CoA:3-ketoacid CoA transferase deficiency ?
A: These resources address the diagnosis or management of succinyl-CoA:3-ketoacid CoA transferase deficiency:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Succinyl-CoA acetoacetate transferase deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Ketones--Urine  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Serum Ketones Test   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care