Topic: Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone

Q: What is (are) Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone ?
A: Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) occurs when an excessive amount of antidiuretic hormone is released resulting in water retention and a low sodium level. It is most common among older people. It has many causes including, but not limited too, pain, stress, exercise, a low blood sugar level, certain disorders of the heart, thyroid gland, kidneys, or adrenal glands, and the use of certain medications. Disorders of the lungs and certain cancers may increase the risk of developing SIADH. Treatment includes fluid restriction and sometimes the use of medications that decrease the effect of antidiuretic hormone on the kidneys.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone? Symptoms of syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone include water retention and low sodium level. Low sodium levels may cause lethargy and confusion. Severe low levels of sodium in the body may cause muscle twitching, seizures, stupor, coma, and death. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Decreased circulating renin level - Elevated systolic blood pressure - Hypernatriuria - Hyponatremia - Irritability - Seizures - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.

---

Q: What causes Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone ?
A: What causes syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone? Many things can cause syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), including brain injury, brain infection, brain abscesses, subarachnoid hemorrhage, encephalitis, meningitis, Guillain-Barr syndrome, delirium tremens, multiple sclerosis, lung cancer, pancreatic cancer, thymoma, ovarian cancer, lymphoma,  pneumonia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, lung abscess, tuberculosis, cystic fibrosis, surgery, and drugs. SIADH has also been reported in association with AIDS, temporal arteritis, polyarteritis nodosa, sarcoidosis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, carcinoma of the cervix, olfactory neuroblastoma, and herpes zoster infection of the chest wall. Often the underlying cause of the condition can not be determined. In these cases the condition is said to be idiopathic.

---

Q: What are the treatments for Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone ?
A: How might the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone be treated? Treatment of syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) may involve fluid restriction, treatment of the underlying cause once determined, and medication that decreases the effect of antidiuretic hormone on the kidneys.