Topic: Trichomegaly with intellectual disability, dwarfism and pigmentary degeneration of retina

Q: What are the symptoms of Trichomegaly with intellectual disability, dwarfism and pigmentary degeneration of retina ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Trichomegaly with intellectual disability, dwarfism and pigmentary degeneration of retina? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Trichomegaly with intellectual disability, dwarfism and pigmentary degeneration of retina. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of retinal pigmentation 90% Abnormality of the eyelashes 90% Abnormality of the genital system 90% Anterior hypopituitarism 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Decreased nerve conduction velocity 90% Delayed eruption of teeth 90% Delayed skeletal maturation 90% Heterochromia iridis 90% Intrauterine growth retardation 90% Nystagmus 90% Thick eyebrow 90% Truncal obesity 90% Visual impairment 90% Fine hair 50% Frontal bossing 50% Prominent occiput 50% Synophrys 50% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Central heterochromia - Cryptorchidism - Delayed puberty - Distal amyotrophy - Distal muscle weakness - Growth hormone deficiency - Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism - Hypoplasia of penis - Intellectual disability - Long eyebrows - Long eyelashes - Peripheral axonal neuropathy - Pigmentary retinal degeneration - Severe short stature - Small for gestational age - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.