Topic: Urachal cyst

Q: What is (are) Urachal cyst ?
A: Urachal cyst is a sac-like pocket of tissue that develops in the urachus, a primitive structure that connects the umbilical cord to the bladder in the developing baby. Although it normally disappears prior to birth, part of the urachus may remain in some people. Urachal cysts can develop at any age, but typically affect older children and adults. Urachal cysts are often not associated with any signs or symptoms unless there are complications such as infection. In these cases, symptoms may include abdominal pain, fever, pain with urination and/or hematuria. Treatment typically includes surgery to drain the cyst and/or remove the urachus.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Urachal cyst ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of a urachal cyst? In most cases, urachal cysts are not associated with any signs or symptoms unless there are complications such as infection. Possible symptoms vary, but may include: Lower abdominal pain Fever Abdominal lump or mass Pain with urination Urinary tract infection Hematuria

---

Q: What causes Urachal cyst ?
A: What causes a urachal cyst? A urachal cyst occurs when a pocket of air or fluid develops in the urachus. Before birth, the urachus is a primitive structure that connects the umbilical cord to the bladder in the developing baby. The urachus normally disappears before birth, but part of the urachus may remain in some people after they are born. This can lead to urachal abnormalities such as urachal cysts.

---

Q: How to diagnose Urachal cyst ?
A: How is a urachal cyst diagnosed? The diagnosis of a urachal cyst may be suspected based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. The following tests may then be ordered to confirm the diagnosis: Ultrasound Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI scan) Computed Tomography (CT scan)

---

Q: What are the treatments for Urachal cyst ?
A: How might a urachal cyst be treated? In many cases, the diagnosis of a urachal cyst is only made when there are complications such as infection. Although some cases of infected urachal cysts have reportedly resolved without any intervention, surgical treatment is generally recommended which involves draining the cyst. Because there is a small risk that a urachal cyst may become malignant (cancerous), additional surgery is often performed to completely remove the urachus.