Topic: Warm antibody hemolytic anemia

Q: What is (are) Warm antibody hemolytic anemia ?
A: Warm antibody hemolytic anemia is the most common form of autoimmune hemolytic anemia. It is defined by the presence of  autoantibodies that attach to and destroy red blood cells at temperatures equal to or greater than normal body temperature. The disease is characterized by symptoms related to anemia, including fatigue, difficulty breathing, jaundice and dark urine. In severe disease, fever, chest pain, syncope or heart failure may occur. Hemolysis (the breakdown of red blood cells) occurs mainly in the spleen, so mild splenomegaly is relatively common. Treatment typically involves a corticosteroid like prednisone. In cases that don't respond to treatment, splenectomy may be considered. Chronic and severe disease may be treated with Rituximab or immunosuppressive medications.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Warm antibody hemolytic anemia ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Warm antibody hemolytic anemia? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Warm antibody hemolytic anemia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of erythrocytes 90% Autoimmunity 90% Migraine 90% Pallor 90% Arthralgia 50% Hematological neoplasm 50% Skin rash 50% Abnormality of temperature regulation 7.5% Abnormality of the liver 7.5% Abnormality of urine homeostasis 7.5% Arrhythmia 7.5% Congestive heart failure 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.