Topic: WaterhouseFriderichsen syndrome

Q: What is (are) WaterhouseFriderichsen syndrome ?
A: WaterhouseFriderichsen syndrome is adrenal gland failure due to bleeding into the adrenal gland. It is usually caused by severe meningococcal infection or other severe, bacterial infection. Symptoms include acute adrenal gland insufficiency, and profound shock. Most patients with this condition are children, although adults may rarely be affected. It is deadly if not treated immediately.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of WaterhouseFriderichsen syndrome ?
A: What are the symptoms of Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome? Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome is characterized by the abrupt onset of fever, petechiae, septic shock, and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) followed by acute hemorrhagic necrosis of the adrenal glands and severe cardiovascular dysfunction. Patients often experience prodromic, nonspecific symptoms, including malaise, headache, weakness, dizziness, cough, arthralgia (joint pain), and myalgia (muscle pain).  A characteristic skin rash with a typical evolution occurs in approximately 75% of patients with Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome. In its early stages, the rash consists of small, pink macules or papules. These are rapidly followed by petechial lesions, which gradually transform into large, purpuric, coalescent plaques in late stages of the disease.

---

Q: What causes WaterhouseFriderichsen syndrome ?
A: What causes Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome? Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome is most often associated with meningococcal disease (accounts for 80% of cases). The syndrome also has been associated with other bacterial pathogens, including Streptococcus pneumoniae, group A beta-hemolytic streptococci, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae (group B), Salmonella choleraesuis, Pasteurella multocida, Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, and Plesiomonas shigelloides. It may also be associated with a history of splenectomy. In rare cases, it may be caused by the use of medications that promote blood clotting, low platelet counts, primary antiphospholipid syndrome, renal vein thrombosis or steroid use. While the exact mechanism of disease is not clear, activation of several cytokine mediators appears to lead to sepsis and shock.

---

Q: What are the treatments for WaterhouseFriderichsen syndrome ?
A: How might Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome be treated? Treatment may include antibiotics and glucocorticoids.  Other treatment is symptomatic and supportive.