Topic: Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome

Q: What is (are) Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome ?
A: Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome is a rare genetic condition characterized by distinctive facial features, hairy elbows, short stature, and intellectual disability. This condition is caused by changes (mutations) in the KMT2A gene (also known as the MLL gene). It is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most cases result from new (de novo) mutations that occur only in an egg or sperm cell, or just after conception. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive and may include special education classes and speech and occupational therapies aimed at increasing motor functioning and language.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Constipation 5% Delayed skeletal maturation 5% Long eyelashes 5% Muscular hypotonia 5% Sacral dimple 5% Seizures 5% Tapered finger 5% Aggressive behavior - Blepharophimosis - Broad-based gait - Clinodactyly of the 5th finger - Delayed speech and language development - Epicanthus - Failure to thrive - Flat face - High palate - Hypertelorism - Intellectual disability - Long philtrum - Low-set ears - Short middle phalanx of finger - Short stature - Short toe - Strabismus - Synophrys - Thick eyebrow - Wide nose - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.