Topic: Wyburn Mason's syndrome

Q: What is (are) Wyburn Mason's syndrome ?
A: Wyburn Mason's syndrome is a condition in which blood vessels do not form correctly in both the retina of one eye and a part of the brain.  These malformed blood vessels are called arteriovenous malformations (AVM).  Wyburn Mason's syndrome is present from birth (congenital) and the cause is unknown.  Individuals with this condition may have additional AVMs in other parts of the body, particularly the face.  The symptoms of this condition are quite variable and depend on the size, location, and shape of the AVMs.  Affected individuals may have no symptoms or may experience headaches, problems with vision, seizures, or partial paralysis (hemiparesis).  Treatment usually consists of periodic visits to the doctor to see if the AVMs are changing over time.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Wyburn Mason's syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Wyburn Mason's syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Wyburn Mason's syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the retinal vasculature 90% Abnormality of the skin 90% Aneurysm 90% Peripheral arteriovenous fistula 90% Cerebral palsy 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Hemiplegia/hemiparesis 50% Migraine 50% Seizures 50% Visual impairment 50% Abnormality of eye movement 7.5% Abnormality of retinal pigmentation 7.5% Behavioral abnormality 7.5% Hearing impairment 7.5% Intracranial hemorrhage 7.5% Meningitis 7.5% Nausea and vomiting 7.5% Neurological speech impairment 7.5% Proptosis 7.5% Reduced consciousness/confusion 7.5% Tinnitus 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.