Topic: Young syndrome

Q: What is (are) Young syndrome ?
A: Young syndrome is a condition whose signs and symptoms may be similar to those seen in cystic fibrosis, including bronchiectasis, sinusitis, and obstructive azoospermia (a condition in which sperm are produced but do not mix with the rest of the ejaculatory fluid due to a physical obstruction, resulting in nonexistent levels of sperm in semen) . The condition is usually diagnosed in middle-aged men who undergo evaluation for infertility. Although the exact cause has not been identified, it is believed to be a genetic condition. At this time, there is no known effective treatment or cure for Young syndrome.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Young syndrome ?
A: What are the signs and symptoms of Young syndrome? The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Young syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Decreased fertility 90% Recurrent respiratory infections 90% Abnormality of the pancreas 50% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Azoospermia - Bronchiectasis - Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung - Recurrent bronchitis - Recurrent sinopulmonary infections - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.