Topic: Your Guide to Diabetes: Type 1 and Type 2

Q: What is (are) Your Guide to Diabetes: Type 1 and Type 2 ?
A: Diabetes is when your blood glucose, also called blood sugar, is too high. Blood glucose is the main type of sugar found in your blood and your main source of energy. Glucose comes from the food you eat and is also made in your liver and muscles. Your blood carries glucose to all of your bodys cells to use for energy.
                
Your pancreasan organ, located between your stomach and spine, that helps with digestionreleases a hormone it makes, called insulin, into your blood. Insulin helps your blood carry glucose to all your bodys cells. Sometimes your body doesnt make enough insulin or the insulin doesnt work the way it should. Glucose then stays in your blood and doesnt reach your cells. Your blood glucose levels get too high and can cause diabetes or prediabetes.
                
Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause health problems.
                
*See the Pronunciation Guide for tips on how to say the the words in bold type.

---

Q: What is (are) Your Guide to Diabetes: Type 1 and Type 2 ?
A: Prediabetes is when the amount of glucose in your blood is above normal yet not high enough to be called diabetes. With prediabetes, your chances of getting type 2 diabetes, heart disease, and stroke are higher. With some weight loss and moderate physical activity, you can delay or prevent type 2 diabetes. You can even return to normal glucose levels, possibly without taking any medicines.

---

Q: What are the symptoms of Your Guide to Diabetes: Type 1 and Type 2 ?
A: The signs and symptoms of diabetes are
                
- being very thirsty  - urinating often  - feeling very hungry  - feeling very tired  - losing weight without trying  - sores that heal slowly  - dry, itchy skin  - feelings of pins and needles in your feet  - losing feeling in your feet  - blurry eyesight
                
Some people with diabetes dont have any of these signs or symptoms. The only way to know if you have diabetes is to have your doctor do a blood test.